This is Jockel podcast number 332 with echo Charles and me, Jockel willing. Good evening, I go.
So when I first started this podcast, when we first started this podcast, I was talking about different situations.
How I handled different situations, what I thought about various subjects, different viewpoints.
I had concerning leadership and really concerning human nature.
And almost immediately, you started getting feedback and started getting asked questions and people would say,
hey, have you studied stoicism or are you, did you do a lot of work?
You know, looking at at Nietzsche or some other ancient or modern school of philosophy?
And the short answer was that no, I didn't do that.
I mean, I left high school during the military. So there wasn't this big educational background for me.
I'm not an academic of any kind. In fact, there was a funny, one of the earliest live events that I did.
And it was a relatively cultured audience out there.
And someone asked, you know, hey, who's your favorite, who's your favorite philosopher?
And I said, let me. And no one laughed, like I laughed, but no one else laughed.
And so I added, I said, you know, let me from from motorhead and a couple of people sort of awkwardly laughed, but not much.
And later on, we explored this idea a little bit more in the podcast.
And because look, there's much to be learned from old philosophers and old thinkers.
And as it turns out, I agree with animal line with a lot of what they say, no doubt about it.
I'm not trying to say anything negative about these ancient philosophers and the theories that they had.
But the fact of the matter is I just didn't study them.
I mean, like I said, I was a shitty high school student.
I didn't, I don't think I read any books in high school.
So yeah, I didn't learn anything about these things.
I just figured these things out through my own random trials and tribulations in life.
And it was a similar situation with Jordan Peterson when he came on the podcast for the first time.
It was really obvious that we had come to many of the same conclusions in our views of life.
But he got to those conclusions through a rigorous academic study.
And work as a clinical psychologist.
And I got there through my experiences in life and in the teams.
And I've been very lucky in that regard.
Very lucky to kind of stumble into things.
Been guided in certain situations.
Been shoved in some directions.
Made some good decisions along the way.
Made some bad decisions.
And been lucky enough to live through it and learn from it.
So I've been very, very lucky.
I also pay attention to these kind of things.
A lot of times I was paying attention to these kind of things.
Because I was trying to teach them.
I originally started paying attention to leadership because I had to learn it in order to become a leader.
So I was paying attention to what watching what leaders were doing.
And eventually I was paying attention to leadership because I was teaching it.
And so I saw things.
And I stumbled into things.
And you know, one of the things I wrote about leadership strategy and tactics.
I mean, my first platoon were clearing gas oil platforms.
I do a big write up about this and in that book.
But my platoon ends up on a skirmish line.
We're all.
We're all looking down our weapons.
Looking to engage targets and no one's making a call.
No one's making any kind of a decision.
And I.
As a new guy.
I take a step back.
Which means I brought in my field of view.
I look around so I can see more and I.
A nice calm comes over me.
And now I can see what we need to do and I make a call.
And I started to teach that.
I started to teach that to young leaders.
Hey, you need to take a step back.
You need to broaden your field of view.
You need to look around.
And it's going to calm you down and allow you to make a decision.
I also.
What tell guys.
Hey, you need to take a breath.
And I didn't have some, you know,
I wasn't saying you need to take some spiritual transcendent breath.
You need to reach deep and hear inner soul and breathe.
I wouldn't say in that.
The actual reason I was saying is because you don't want to sound panic.
When you come up on the radio.
You don't want to come up on the radio and say,
I need to get everyone over this building.
You don't want to do that.
You don't want to do it.
Number one because everyone else is going to now panic.
And number two, because everyone's going to make fun of you.
And you get back from this operation.
So you don't want to either one of these.
So when you have to make a decision,
you take a step back and then you take a breath.
You detach.
You broaden your field of view.
And these things will calm you down and allow you to make better decisions.
And recently,
I've heard some podcasts.
Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan, by the way.
They've had a guy on a couple times.
They named Andrew Heberman.
And this guy is a doctor, a neuroscientist, a professor.
And as I was listening to what he was saying,
a lot of the things that I have been teaching
were aligned with what he was saying.
And believe it or not, one of the things was a broad field of vision comes you down.
Taking a breath is something that scientifically calms you down.
Physiologically calms you down.
And guess what?
I know this, the calmer you are, the better decision you're going to make.
Then there are other things when I listen to him talk that I recognize from my own experiences.
Cold water.
But doesn't feel good when you get in it,
but it feels good when you get done,
lifting weights, fasting, things that I had kind of instinctively
or through trial and error, figure it out.
We're now being reinforced by someone that actually academically understood the science behind my instincts.
Now my instincts are not always right by any stretch of the imagination.
I should probably write an entire litany of books about the dumb things I've done.
But I'm always looking to see, hey, if there's some things I'm doing right, why are they right?
I'm doing wrong, why are they wrong?
And always looking to increase the understanding that I have behind the things that I think I've figured out,
which is why we are fortunate to have Dr. Andrew Huberman here with us tonight to help explain and explore what we think.
But we think we know what we think and how we can get better at all of the above.
Andrew, thanks for coming down, man. It's good to meet you.
Great to be here.
Did that when I was listening to you talk and I was hearing you talk about how you're if you're focused on something small,
it amps up your adrenaline.
I was listening to that as a little bit.
Oh, it was all these things we're coming together, all these dots we're getting connected. It's kind of crazy, right?
It's pretty wild. I mean, I think some people may know this.
Many people probably won't, which is that your eyes are too pieces of your brain.
They're the only two pieces of your brain. And yes, they are brain for those of you that want to look it up.
They're part of your central nervous system and they're outside your cranial vault.
And they're there to set the aperture, right? The either tunnel vision or the broad field of view, not just on your vision, but on your thinking,
which is what you described.
And widening your field of view, your visual aperture will allow you to parse more information.
It also changes your perception of time.
So the simplest way to put this is that when you are in a narrow field of view, it's a bit like having a video camera in slow motion.
Your frame rate is higher, but in that small aperture, you're looking at minor details.
As soon as you hear, you think duh, of course.
But the opposite is also true when you broaden your field of view.
And that could be by literally moving your head around, but it can also just be by keeping your head more less stationary and just deliberately broadening your field of view.
You call it panoramic vision.
You are taking smaller frame rate, or I should say sorry, larger bins of time, but the way the visual system works is really clever.
It actually allows you to sense motion more quickly.
So when you run and catch a ball, or when you're walking along, you blink and it be hits your eyelid, you didn't see it coming, see it in quotes.
But you are in that panoramic field of view, and your reaction time is four times what it is when you're in that narrow aperture.
Now, again, I just want to reiterate this and just clarify this.
For like 20 years, I have been teaching young seal leaders, and then, you know, other people in the world and the business world and the, in the first responder world in the military at large.
For 20 years, I've been saying, hey listen, when things start to get wild, you need to get off your gun, you need to take a step back, you need to broaden your field of view, you need to look around to see what's happening.
I've been telling people that for 20 years, only because it just worked for me.
And I luckily figured that out in my very first seal, but too.
And it took me a while just to where I said, oh, that's something I need to tell other people to do.
Like, I figured it out and would do it, but then once I was in position where I was teaching these things.
So that's just like wild that there's all these physiological things that occur that for me was, I knew it.
I knew it. I knew that you better do this.
Because I mean, imagine you want to talk about a field of view. Imagine what your field of view is like when you're staring down the barrel of your gun.
It's tiny. Your field of view is so focused. And you don't see anything.
I mean, other than the target right in front of you, you don't see anything.
And that's what happens to when when a young seal is in a leadership position.
That's what happens to them. They get, they're looking down their weapon and they don't see anything. That's happening.
They can't make any decisions because they don't see the entire picture.
They see nothing. So that's kind of crazy. And that's again, these are just some of the examples that I pulled from listening to you and listening to your podcast, by the way,
Huberman Lab.
Before we get down any more rabbit holes, let's talk about where you came from, how you ended up in this spot.
Because I would say you didn't take sort of a standard route to end up where you ended up.
So let's talk about young Andrew Huberman. What's going on? Where are you born?
I was actually born in Stanford Hospital. Oh, okay.
I joke. I was born in Stanford Hospital. I trained at Stanford. I work at Stanford. I'll probably die at Stanford.
Hopefully a long time from now. People say you get to die in your office.
We're supposed to die in the Stanford.
How are you born there? Why?
Yes, so my parents worked there. So my dad's from South America. He actually came here. He's a physicist, but he came here from Argentina on a Navy scholarship.
So the Navy page for my dad to leave Argentina where there were no opportunities to do science came to the US.
When did you ever see Pennsylvania? Over the years, he's worked on various projects related to government.
I actually don't know what he's talking about. He does now.
But growing up, well, he met my mother in New York City, and she's from East Coast, from Jersey.
And my grandfather went to college on the GI Bill. So he was a World War II vet.
My mom, while he was in graduate school, and he was a real physical guy.
That would come up later.
Your dad was. My grandfather and my mom got it.
So my dad, my mom met move to California and had my sister and I.
And this was a time I should say when Palo Alto is no dot com, no Silicon Valley.
In this scope of wealth in the Bay Area, we were middle class.
We weren't up in the middle class.
So we single single story home. I mean, we didn't want for things.
You know, I didn't imagine about having Ferrari or any of that.
But there were kids in the other high school. They're two high schools in Palo Alto.
I went to the one where all the nerdy kids went. It's actually called gun high school.
And then it has a funny reputation, not funny. Has an infamous reputation.
It's the highest suicide rate of any high school in the United States.
For reasons that we can talk about.
So from the time I was born until about age 13,
I would say, I'm a magical childhood.
A bunch of young boys about my age lived down the street.
Their older sisters, they all seem to have older sisters who were about my sister's age.
And so it was biking around and skateboarding around playing baseball on the street,
soccer swimming. Those are big sports in the Bay Area.
And we ate dinner together every night as a family.
You know, we just kind of have a great life.
And this is so this is like this until you're around 13.
Yeah, until as 13. And then my parents split up.
This was at a time in the 80s when I think I was only one other kid in school with the worst parents.
Remember these times right now. It's rampant.
But unfortunately, they didn't have the skills to handle it properly.
So just imagine the rulebook of all the things parents aren't supposed to do in a divorce.
They basically systematically broke every one of those.
My dad moved away and was overseas for a bit.
And I was at home with my mom and she struggled with the fracture of our family in a major way.
This was right about the time I hit puberty.
So it's like they're on gasoline on fire.
Right. And at the time I was a bit indiscate boarding.
This was the early days of the bones brigade animal chin videos.
Oh yeah. Okay. So for those of you that don't know, you can look it up and you get a sense.
But I quickly got into the skateboard community and dropped everything else.
I'll stop playing soccer.
Really stop doing any kind of structured school sports and things of that sort.
And just really indiscate boarding.
And the reason I got indiscate boarding was you didn't eat your dad to go.
Socker, all the other kids had dads there.
My dad wasn't there. It was kind of embarrassing.
My mom would have gone.
And actually she would have been the one shouting the loudest.
She's from Jersey after all. She's got teeth.
But you know, boy scouts wasn't going to be my thing.
And some friends I went into Eagle Scouts.
I was playing lacrosse in water polo.
And you know, skateboarding made a lot more sense.
And so what ended up happening was from about 13, 14, 15.
I started riding the 7F bus up to San Francisco.
There was a big gathering of kids in Justin Herman Plaza.
The now infamous famous EMB crowd, the embarked arrow.
And this was a scene of very nascent scene at the time of young,
feral guys. It was almost exclusively guys.
That hung out there all day long. None of them went to school.
They drank 40 ounces and 40 ounces.
And you know, people were smoking weed and drinking and skateboarding.
And there were fights and people would rip off tourists.
It was, it was kind of a rough scene.
But there was also some amazing skateboarding.
Now, I never really liked drugs or alcohol.
So I lucked out in that way.
For me it was all about the skateboarding.
And over the years, you know, those early years of going up there.
I got to know a lot of guys.
I would say about a third of them have just to give you a sense of where it went.
About a third of them have gone on to found companies and do really well.
I'm fortunate to be friendly with guys like Danny Way.
I talk to, you know, I remember the young rob dirt it coming through.
And a lot of guys went on to create some impressive things.
And did very well.
About a third or just living their lives.
And I don't know where they are.
And about a full third of the guys I knew from back then are dead or in jail.
So saw a lot of fights, a lot of drinking, a lot of guys got their girlfriends pregnant.
It was a mix, you know.
And I suppose looking back in that time I was kind of aimless, right?
I wasn't that good a skateboard.
I want to be really clear because a skateboarding community is kind of ruthless in terms of holding accountability.
Almost as much of probably as much as in the teams, right?
I have a number of friends on the teams.
Like you want to be very careful with what you impl- what one implies.
And so I don't want to imply that I was faded to become a Danny Way.
And I didn't have the skills.
Actually my body wasn't developed yet.
I kept getting hurt.
I was skinny.
I kept breaking feet and getting hurt doing things that other guys could do trivially.
So that was really tough.
And feeling like I couldn't keep up.
But all my friends were there.
And, you know, I could throw out a bunch of names.
But I would mention some of the brighter lights in that scene.
You know, I got to see and witness great skateboarding from a guy named Mike Carroll,
who's an incredible skateboarder.
And his older brother, Greg Carroll, was kind of a big brother to all these
parentless kids.
I also learned that going to school was an option for certain kids in the city.
And here I was this kid from Palo Alto and I thought, well, I just won't go any more.
Well, what ended up happening was someone took notice.
And that I wasn't in school.
And one day when I was back in high school, so it's a bit ninth grade.
I got called into the office and sitting down and they were talking to me.
And I was like, how are things at home?
How are things going?
They start probing.
There's this guy sitting in the corner.
And at some point, I realized, I think they're going to take me away.
So that's what ended up happening.
You know, how much school did you skip?
Yeah.
I could tell you more about the curves in the gun high school parking lot that I can tell you about any classes I took up until about the 11th grade.
And in the 11th grade, as the story goes, the only reason I really went there is because there was a girl in the 12th grade who was very beautiful,
who for whatever reason had a lapse of judgment and decided to go out with me.
And then ended up being my girlfriend and I'm grateful to her because as the story eventually goes, you know, that was the reason I went off to college at all, although that didn't go well either.
So I wasn't going much at all.
And so my grades were not good.
And your mom was just, was she working at this time?
What was she doing?
She's like, just she was working?
Yeah, yeah, San Francisco and Skate all there. Yeah, allowing me an air quote.
I remember me and a guy who has gone on to do very well as a documentary filmmaker Jake Rosenberg, he actually made the waiting for lightning documentary about Danny Way.
And a couple of other guys took Jay Coves parents Volvo, Van again or whatever those wagon and things I forget what those are.
I don't know if they still made those are pretty cool.
And so that's the reason why I went to the Reno Nationals for a week mid exams.
You know, and just kind of went out there, I think we forged signatures.
Kids don't do this, by the way, I'm a professor now, I just want to say for the record, wait to get your tattoos.
Don't get the pull the earrings for reasons that don't even need explanation.
And please, please stay in school.
But when up there, I had me manage to get picked up by a wheel company in a truck company.
What truck company?
Oh, yeah. And they put me on wheel company.
I was spitfire.
Okay.
But you were like at least writing.
I could manage and getting free trucks.
That's all you're getting.
Yeah, so there's a money.
No.
So gosh, because somewhere out there, the great Jim Thibau who owns Deluxe, which is real skateboarding,
and I'll ante here on all this, probably listening, thank you, Jim, he put me on out of sympathy.
I was hanging around the factory Deluxe.
So in San Francisco, there was an amazing thing about skateboarding that I'm guessing most people don't know,
which is this guy, Fausto Vatello, who started thrasher magazine.
And also independent trucks, the great independent trucks.
And then he had a brilliant idea, which was why don't we just make a bunch of companies,
thunder, spitfire, venture?
We'll guess what folks, it's all the same company.
And so kids, you know, you say, oh, I ride thunder's no-I ride in these, it's all ermico.
That's where they poured this stuff.
So during those years of high school, I started going up to the factory and hanging around the factory,
which is in Hunter's point, which is the only truly dangerous part of San Francisco.
At least at the time was the only truly dangerous part.
And it's a really watch yourself there.
I saw a guy get pushed off a motorcycle, beaten up in his motorcycle, taking a stop like midday.
This is, you know, this is a really rough box.
And so, you know, here I was this 14 year old kid from Palo Alto, getting a pretty quick, street education.
Started getting to fight a little bit.
Like I said, fortunately, didn't like drugs or alcohol because of it.
And you just randomly didn't like drugs or alcohol.
Was there something in your parenting that made you feel that way?
Did you not like the loss of control?
You know, it was probably the drugs and alcohol that I was exposed to.
So alcohol made me feel kind of sedated as it does, as a forebrain inhibitor, as we'd say, in neuroscience.
And the drugs at the time people were mostly smoking weed and hash, taken LSD and mushrooms.
And none of that really appealed.
I mean, I do have a drug and it's adrenaline.
I love the clarity of mind and the energy that comes from adrenaline.
And I learned early on that beautiful but very dangerous edge where everything is clear.
You have immense amount of energy.
And if you can regulate a bit, you're incredibly calm.
And yet there's that readiness in your body.
I'm sure as I describe this many people and especially you guys will know this feeling very well.
And it's a very drug-like state.
It's as powerful as being in love and lust all at once.
It's just it's that it's a beautiful tunnel.
And I fell in love with it pretty early on.
And I also love camaraderie.
And my family quickly became this big group of feral kids.
And some older guys that really took care of all of us.
People like on home at night are you squatting somewhere?
So not sleeping on the street.
There were guys that slept in market air all the time.
I wasn't one of those.
I would stay at this guy Ray Myers house.
He was a skateboarder but also a computer programmer.
And this links back to that day where they were going to take me away.
I ended up leaving to the city.
So I bolted.
I messed up your story. That was your freshman year.
That was my freshman year maybe early sophomore year.
And you think these guys are going to take me.
Right.
It made me into some kind of whatever.
So I took off.
I went to Ray's house.
I took bus up to San Francisco.
I bolted.
I think I said I had to use the bathroom.
And then they went obviously.
They weren't thinking.
I would know what to deal with.
And I went to Ray's house.
He lived in his parents' attic.
He was a computer programmer.
And also a professional skateboarder.
One of the more stable people in that world.
What year is this?
This would be 1989.
And you know, and I don't know anything like, well, I had shaved head.
And you know, and maybe my hair might have been dyed blue black or something.
And I was just excited because you know, I had whatever new pair of kicks on.
And was, oh, and the thunder thing.
If you rode for thunder back then, you got the shirt that is in my high school yearbook.
And I saw it the other day, which says, I ride for thunder trucks.
And all I got was this Laos E. T. Sherry.
And they only made a few over the home.
But if you have one of those out there, I'd love to love to see it.
But I went to Ray's and stayed there for a bit.
And at one point he said, you know, you can't stay here.
And I said, why not?
And he said, I live at home with my parents.
Like, this is weird.
You live in my house.
You know, you have to go home.
So then she went back.
And then it was no forgiveness.
They took me to a place up the peninsula,
which was neither juvenile hall,
nor mental hospital, nor jail.
It was this kind of true and troubled kids place.
And I'll never forget what they told us.
They said, okay, there's an adult ward over there,
and they're crazy.
And then there are these little kids younger than you.
I think it was younger than 14 in this other building.
And they're really disturbed.
But you guys, you're normal.
You just have a lot of problems.
And I thought to myself, that's definitely what they're telling the people.
There's no things.
But what happened was I was on a 72 hour hold.
You know, I hadn't done anything.
I hadn't harmed anyone of myself.
So, and it was on the third day that one of the counselors there,
who was a really good guy.
You know, sometimes forget the people that do that kind of low income work
with kids like me back then, and kids now,
probably you didn't graduate school or something.
A lot of these people have their own set of problems,
and that's what led them there.
And he sat down and he said, listen, you can get out of here
and go right back to what you were doing.
Or you can ask whether or not there's anything here of value.
And at the time I was pretty frightened.
I was in this place.
My roommate was this guy.
He looked like Richard Romeras the night stalker.
Because if you haven't seen that documentary on that,
I'll make you never want to live in Los Angeles County.
Although, Richard Romeras was happy to travel to kill you.
It turned out.
So I remember staying up at night and being really frightened.
I thought, I don't know, this guy's going to try and harm me
in any kind of way.
Turned out he was just another sad story of somebody
who was just really, really troubled.
He was really oddly.
He was one of the bigger, more dangerous looking guys in the place,
but he was cutting on the bottoms of his feet,
so that no one would see horrible.
And that's some good kids in there who, you know, had different sets of problems
and me, a lot of them, drug problems.
Some of them had been molested.
Fortunately, I never experienced that.
You know, and, wow, like, I am in trouble, right?
I'm, I'm, I'm, this is a long way from home.
It's also a long way from embarking arrow.
I called my team manager.
I'm going to name him this time because we're friends now.
His name was Steve Ruggie, Shruggie.
Really good guy.
Team manager from Funderford.
I thought I'm going to.
And to like, and again, they put me on the flow team out of sympathy.
Thank you, Steve.
Thanks, Shrugg.
And I called him and I said, listen, they got me behind lock and key.
I don't know what to do.
And he said, you called me.
And I said, yeah, and he said, bro, you're the most normal guy I know.
And I said, I know.
And I'm in here and he said, no, including me.
I said, I can't help you.
And I thought, wow, I'm in trouble.
So what ended up happening was I was let out.
And as a condition of being let back in school,
I had to go to school at the chart a certain number of days.
And I was assigned to do therapy twice a week.
And at the time, no one did where if they did, they didn't talk about therapy.
This was a good, well-hunting.
This was before any kind of sense.
Actually, as a little factoid, I saw some statistics out of Stanford.
I think it was college-wide statistics in the US that 10 years ago,
if you asked college students, how many of them go to or are willing to explore therapy,
or something like 14%.
Now it's in excess of 90%.
We could argue whether or not that reflects a good or a bad change.
But anyway, I was assigned to a guy who was remarkable.
He really understood what I was going through,
which I have to imagine was just a stroke of luck.
He understood that my home life didn't have structure at the time
there was no strong paternal role.
Even though my dad's a pretty strong-minded person,
I was strong in pinnies and Argentine after all,
just that I was spinning out.
I was going to be a very strong person.
He strongly discouraged me from doing any drugs,
because he understood that that was going to be a risk in my current configuration.
He understood that I wasn't going to get excited about school right away.
I was always a reader, so I was going to tower books and reading about fitness and reading about.
I loved to read about fitness.
I liked history, and I liked to read about sex.
Not the porno magazines, but I would go read about sexual health.
I was like, I was like, I don't know.
I'm going to read about fitness, and I'm going to read about fitness.
I'm going to read about fitness, lifting weights,
like the Elington Garden books and the old super slow movement stuff.
And Mike Menser, and actually what happened was he said,
what do you enjoy doing?
I told him what my interest was, and he said, well, you should exercise.
He swims, I think, you know, you don't learn much about your therapist.
If it's appropriate therapy relationship.
So I started swimming about a mile a night.
I'd run to this pool, I'd hop the fence, because I'm a skateboarder.
I'd say I'd go in during the day.
Fences are there to go over.
So I'd hop the fence and I'd swim at night.
And then I started running, and I started lifting weights.
And there was a teacher at our school as name as Bob Peters.
Big guy football player, and he taught me out of lift weights.
And then I started running cross country.
And eventually I got a girlfriend.
I had done dating the skateboard way.
Like there were girls that we meet at contests in the other thing.
A really nice smart, very sweet and kind girl who's dad actually was a real blue collar guy.
How much time has passed in it?
So now I'm 16 or so.
I get my drivers license.
Soft more now.
I'm a junior.
I started school in the fall.
I was always the youngest in my class.
What do you think?
How did this therapist actually connect to you?
Because most of the things I see with kids, your truly included when I was a kid of super rebellious kid.
I didn't listen to anybody.
Like that was, you know, any adult just didn't know anything.
And how did you think that person made a connection with you?
It's a great question.
I don't ever ask me that.
Three things.
One was completely nonverbal.
He was physically fit.
I looked at him and I thought,
Yeah, I wouldn't mind looking like that dude someday.
You know, skinny and I kept getting hurt, skateboarding.
And I thought he wasn't really big and yoked,
but he was tall and fatty.
He had good posture and the way he would greet me was not.
He was kind of out of remember.
He had his, uh, so he's kind of a badass.
Yeah, and he had his initial stitch into his socks.
I was like, I guess he probably makes a good money doing this.
But he wasn't, um,
there was no aristocracy about him.
He just, um,
Yeah, he, he looked like the kind of person.
I might want to be.
He looked like he had his life together.
I also remember that one day I came in and he said you're smiling.
And I said, yeah, I'll lead the front eight.
And he said, what does that mean?
And I said, well, I do this thing and he said,
I want you to show me.
So we went downstairs.
I did push push push.
I think I fell a few times.
And then I, you know, clicked down this front eight.
We went upstairs and I was like, wow.
I think that's the first time that, like, a grown man has cared about what I was doing.
Um, and so there was that seed there.
Um, this is the first time I remember that very clearly now.
Um, and then he, I remember falling asleep in this office a lot.
You know, I must have been pretty out of it at times.
And then when I met my girlfriend, um, she was a year older.
I was a little intimidated.
You know, it's a whole other thing when you're just traveling.
And I guess they call, you know, you're just hooking up with girls or whatever.
But when you actually like somebody now,
they've got something to lose, right?
And he really encouraged me to, he said, uh, great advice.
By the way, he said, when it comes to decision making,
ask her opinion, but I think she'll appreciate if you just make the plans.
Hmm.
All right.
So I would pick the restaurant.
I would restaurant back then.
I had no money, right?
But in terms of, um, you know, so I used to run to my girlfriend's house and
wash her car sheet of bronco.
And I was very, very excited to see her wash her as a church on Sundays.
Her dad was a blue collar guy, very little education,
but had done okay in this country by buying apartments and then taking care of them themselves.
And when he's guys with, I remember he had a hundred keys on his key.
Always a sign that somebody works hard, right?
Just remembering what all those keys are to.
Some memory task.
What, what do you, what do you listen to from music right now?
So as you start talking about this,
and I'm sitting here running through my life and thinking about,
well, what kind of people had influence over me?
And there was like a one of one guy that I knew his older brother was a Marine Corps.
Was in the Marine Corps and was a Marine Corps general instructor.
And you know, in my mind when I was like 13 years old,
my saw that, I was like, okay, that dude looks like he can kick ass.
And that seems like a good thing to be able to do.
And then, you know, as I started listening to hardcore music and all of a sudden,
you know, you, you know,
and we roll and black flag is like doing pushups.
And you think, okay, that looks like I need to start doing some pushups.
And then, other, some other hardcore bands where you know that the guys are working out.
And I remember, like, my friends and me were like, okay, well,
looks like we're working out. Why?
Because it's, it's interesting.
You brought up like the, kind of the posture in the stature.
Because when you're a kid and you're 13 and you weigh 138 pounds or whatever,
you see someone that's like 190 pounds.
And they kind of look like, like you said,
that's kind of what I think I should be doing.
Even though it's an interesting thing, I heard, I heard,
I think it was either Rollins or Ian McCuy, McKay.
And they were talking about seeing HR from the bad brains.
And HR from the bad brains was like older.
You know, because they were rounding them in the late 70s,
but he had been an athlete HR from the bad brains.
Had been an athlete in like high school.
He was like a track athlete.
That's how come he could do these flips.
But they like looked at him and he looked like a man,
like a jacked guy and they're like, yes.
And so that again, you see these,
it's an interesting thing that little physical,
a stature means something apparently.
Yeah, these, I guess, you know,
this psychologist, we have to ask Jordan, you know,
these masculine archetypes.
They, you get a seed going there, you know,
it's, there are a couple things.
One important person that I failed to mention,
the guy that sold me my first skateboard,
it's kind of a Gary Hall.
And ran the skateboard shop and was an interesting guy
because he's very physically strong,
plays hockey, but also skateboard.
Actually, it was a professional skateboarder
and they kind of late 70s or early 80s.
He took early on when he saw me going off the rails
because he used to skateboard with him a lot.
He said, listen, your parents are going through a lot.
Whatever you do, do not mess your life up.
By not going to school, not getting a job doing all these things.
So I didn't follow his advice as well as I could of,
but Gary and I have remained close friends
for kind of came in count of years.
Now more than 35 years.
Little, little story here.
He, he's actually the operations manager
from my laboratory at Stanford.
And he's a very put together guy.
If you walk past him on the street,
you wouldn't even know he skateboards.
But he was very in to, you know,
for instance, I've never seen a leaf on his front lawn.
It's edged perfectly.
My laboratory, I'm very proud to say,
and thank you Gary, has passed every single inspection
with 100%.
Nobody does that.
They're gonna find something.
And he makes sure they don't.
So there were examples of people like that
or my therapist, but that I thought,
wow, I would love to be like that person.
But I somehow couldn't find the internal organization
to do it.
You asked about music.
One thing that was just terrible
about the early 90s, about skateboarding.
It was the era of little wheels
and people wearing really baggy clothes with,
you know, bright colors with fruit salad on the front.
And it would be a few years before the Danny Ways
and those guys would come in,
like blasting slayer in ACDC
and jumping over a great wall of China.
But really bringing, it was almost like,
we had everyone, it was like a pre-puburral phase
of skateboarding, which then eventually went through
puberty and some incredible stuff happen.
So the music at the time that kids in my high school
were listening to was also to me was just dreadful.
No disrespect to anybody.
But I mean, people were like hacky-sacky
and listening to fish.
And they are, you know, sure the grateful dead
would play at Frost Ampatheter at Stanford
and we'd go over there for other reasons.
But it just, totally smell.
And like none of that stuff resonated for me.
And then, what happened was I was 14
and Jim Thibau of Deluxe and has great fame
and he said, very quiet humble guy,
but he's sort of the secret parent of all skateboarding.
He can look him off.
He's a very important figure still to this day
and a great person.
I was up at Spitfire Thunder,
the place was called Deluxe, Low Warehouse.
And he gave me a tape.
And it was a ban called crimp shrine,
which is an East Bay punk ban.
And that led me to the discovery of the great operation Ivy.
And then Operation Ivy was featured
in the first H Street video.
The entire album of 27 songs and Operation Ivy
Jesse Michaels and Tim Armstrong,
which is now a rancid fame and transplants
with Travis Barker, okay, and on and on and on.
So when I heard Operation Ivy,
I was, wow.
I mean, I can still feel it in my body now.
Just, I'm not gonna try and sing it, but just here's like,
you know, I got no idea.
It's just so, the energy was so much like,
that's me, that's me.
It's like singing someone on the street that looks just like you.
And it's a feeling inside you, that's me.
And then Operation Ivy, I went to gym and I said,
what do we, where can I get more of this?
And you know, if you like that, stiff little fingers.
I know it's like stiff little fingers.
Yeah, it's gonna be a little bit of a...
I'm fortunate the Operation Ivy won the album.
Yeah, so that, they had that energy,
it's really long, yeah, they broke up because they were a bunch of teenagers touring
and they had this huge success.
Now, fortunately, that led to the great, I mean, my favorite band of all time,
and it tremendous respect and love and admiration and appreciation for Rancid.
So if you were going to, in my mind,
if you were going to design a punk band or a band of any kind,
you'd have a bullet-belted mohawk-eye upfront, that's Tim,
with all this, but like he actually is missing a piece of that front tooth.
And then you'd have an amazing bass player like Matt Freeman,
who's like a big, you know, card guy.
And then you'd have a drummer like Brett Reed,
who actually used to skateboard with us at the Embarket Arrow.
I remember thinking like, no one had tattoos back then,
it was what we call the AutoClave days.
Now these disposable needles back then, it was actually dangerous,
because if they actually ran the AutoClave,
or if they were so over-wall they did it,
and he had a huge spider tattoo on his chest,
and we're like, whoa, that's a commitment.
And then you'd have Lars Frederson, an OIGI, right,
from the South Bay, from San Jose.
And I remember the first time I heard Ransse,
which was the first to three-piece, and then when they added Lars,
and I thought, this is like Operation Ivy graduated,
and went to college, which no, I was guys did.
They get what I'm talking about, but just so much energy,
like the albums would open with, ah,
and once again, I thought, and I was maturing,
right, it gone through, I was going through puberty, and I thought, this.
This is it, and actually I have to say that throughout my entire life,
every Ransse album has trapped to a particular five-year phase of my life,
and I could go on and on about this, and I won't,
but I own every B track, every outtake.
I mean, I've even got a song by Ransse called The Sentence,
which nobody knows, which is queued up in my phone,
so that if I'm on a plane, it starts to go down,
as much as I love the people of my life,
I'm plugging in, and I'm going down, listening to the sentence.
So that was all during those years, and then the fitness thing
really took off because of this, I got football coach,
Bob Peters, and then because my girlfriend at the time,
she was a year older, she had dated a guy that someone showed me a picture
of him, he was this big football player from the other high school,
and I was six foot tall at that time, 150 pounds,
oh my goodness, she must think I'm a dental floss, right?
So I started doing my sit-ups and my push-ups,
and then I started lifting cans of soup, like,
cosy thing, and then I saw an ad from Mike Menser,
in a magazine, and I paid, I was working at the time,
so I started working at a cafe, you know,
busing tables and things like that, and I got a program from Mike Menser,
and got on the phone with him, and he said, listen,
he got on the phone with Mike.
I paid him, yeah.
I paid him, and he explained high intensity training
and bring you muscles to failure, and so I started doing this thing,
of training once, everything, and how much did that cost?
That's probably about 100 bucks at the time.
That's great.
It's been a huge investment, Mike Menser.
Huge investment for me.
And people did eat through that for.
Well, this is a business.
I remember I had to go to Western Union and send them Western Union,
no one's not.
That's great.
And my mother, I remember when he called,
why is this grown man calling you?
And I started doing the, you know, once,
train, rest two days, train, rest two days,
and my body just responded like crazy to that.
So I was eating and training and just growing like a weed,
and as most people know, when you're untrained,
and you start training, even a slight, you know,
training hard, you just grow.
And when you're held, I was, so that was 17,
so I was, your body's just saving with testosterone.
So from this G.A. to whatever, everything.
I mean, from, and from the 16 until,
I guess when I started, I eventually followed that high school
girlfriend off to college.
I went from 150 pounds to 215 in a period of about,
you know, three, three years or so.
It wasn't all solid, but it was solid enough.
I still had the baby fat around, around your face,
but, and I was sprinting and lifting.
And then basically, and are you now back in school?
Are you paying attention to school?
So here's the irony.
I got a girlfriend.
I died my hair back to a normal color.
I started wearing flannels instead of the skateboard gear.
And you dressed like a skateboarder in the 90s,
like you were wearing those big jeans and stuff.
There are photos of those out there.
There are a few videos.
I know, I didn't wear the super baggies.
I got out before that.
You were dating to your clothes.
That was the intro.
I was dating to your clothes.
It's true.
Very embarrassing, garb, which is coming back.
It's coming back for me.
I guess I was a generation before that,
because I guess I'm five years old or six years old in New.
So when I got thrash your magazine,
it was like nothing but hardcore and metal.
And matter of fact, my name,
my subscription to thrash your magazine,
for whatever reason the way I wrote my name
when I mailed in the thing,
they sent it to Volco-Willink.
The way I wrote that is so.
They got files on me at thrash your magazine.
They used to send the magazine to Volco-Willink.
But there was no, it was like hardcore.
And that was it.
Man, it was as it was total rebellion.
It was absolute rebellion.
And that's the way.
And that's how you discovered music.
Yeah, that's where I got, that's where I picked up a lot of music.
And started seeing that and having that attitude.
And that rebellion's attitude has suited me very well
for my whole life.
Most of the time, it's worked out.
Sometimes it's been a little bit much, but yeah, then,
so I joined the Navy.
And that's when, you know,
unfortunately for you, you got roped into big baggy pants.
It stopped right there.
It was pretty bad.
Yeah.
Well, and I stopped skateboarding and started working out.
And I got into Moetai.
Okay.
I started actually opening the doors on this Moetai place.
So they let me train there for free.
It was in San Jose.
I think it still exists.
The Moetai Academy.
And it was interesting.
There were a lot of cops that train there and bodyguard training.
They had some weapons training.
So now I'm hanging around with a different group of guys.
Still liked fighting.
Still had a lot of aggression, but I wasn't skateboarding.
I was hanging out with my girlfriend.
You ever get your ass beaten these fights?
You know, I'm lucky that over the years I've never been knocked down or knocked out.
But I've definitely taken hits.
And, you know, there's that.
I always say the amazing thing about adrenaline is that
when you get in a fight, it's amazing how little it hurts during the fight and how much it hurts afterwards.
So definitely experience the clarity of getting hit and feeling ultra clear.
And again, I don't recommend it to people, especially as you've pointed out many times on your podcast.
And I appreciate that you do this.
You know, you can hit someone just right and it's all fair and square.
And they can, you know, plug and kill you or the person next to you.
And, or, and this all tell a story that that unfortunately happened, you know,
when I went off, basically I went off to college because the girlfriend went to college.
She went to UC Santa Barbara and I was going down there in my senior year,
literally sleeping in my car in the parking lot.
She was my family.
So you're senior year of high school?
Yeah, so she started in college.
So what happened was she was a year ahead of me.
So my junior year I started hanging out with her.
You asked if I was going to school.
I was going, I was dressing the part more of a normal person.
But unfortunately, I was still really challenged in school.
I didn't have the skills.
I hadn't barely, I barely gone in the early years.
I was reading and I was smart enough to kind of get by,
but I wasn't doing very well.
And I thought, what am I going to do with myself?
And she's going to college soon.
I'm sure.
And I decided to say fire science class is down at Mission College,
become a firefighter.
I like hanging out with a bunch of dudes and lifting weights and I love the come rotty.
And I want to make a living.
And, you know, she's the one drives the bronco.
I don't even have a car.
How am I going to get a car or a truck?
You know, I mean, how am I going to live?
And so I started thinking about my future a bit,
but that was as far as I was thinking out.
Then I somehow managed to graduate.
Don't ask me how.
And she went off to college.
And so in that year where she was a year ahead of me,
and I was a senior, I was going down a Santa Barbara to visit her quite a lot.
Sleeping in the parking lot, getting into mischief of various kinds.
But basically, just wanted to be as close to her as I could.
And then I decided, I would apply to college.
And the reason was there was a counselor at mission who said,
well, you know, you can go into the fire service without college degree,
but if you have a college degree, there are some opportunities that open up for you in there that you wouldn't have otherwise.
So I was still in therapy, talked to my therapist.
I think it'd be a good idea.
You seemed to have a mind that wants to consume a lot of knowledge.
So I took the SAT and by some stroke of luck, I, you know,
broke a thousand, which, you know, for gun high school would be considered like the low end,
because everyone there is like, you know, perfect as the only score that it was.
It was acceptable.
And then there was me, you know, and I wrote my college entrance,
I say saying that I'd like to run a station house some day and become a firefighter.
I told a little bit of my story.
It wasn't a sob story or this and that, you know, I just told my story.
And I got in.
So I go to UC Santa Barbara.
She's now living off campus.
I'm staying with her.
I think I had her bed in the dorms.
I show up with what you got into UC Santa Barbara?
I did.
Okay, so yeah, which at the time I think the standards for getting in were lower than they are now.
It's super competitive and all UCs now, but got in and it was a total disaster.
Getting in fights, I got the lifting weights part down.
I would go for runs.
I was training and I'm going to tie to Jim downtown.
Found someone who would hold bags for me and would spar with me a little bit.
Even made some money teaching some self-defense classes on campus and things like that.
You know, and the girlfriend and I are now starting to fracture, mostly because I was like,
wow, there are a lot of other attractive women here.
And not good.
I will say this guys, if there is a woman who is really beautiful dedicated sweet and kind
and it's early, it is worth investing in those early relationships and going through some developmental milestones together.
If you think you'd have to break up just to explore, think twice.
Talk to me first because she would have been a great choice, but I was distracted.
And then I started, I got thrown out of the dorms for fighting.
I had a guy.
You're not.
You don't drink still.
I drank a little bit the first year and then, you know, I, not so much.
For me, it was, I've never really needed to drink.
So if I go out, listen to music, I'm still going to punk rock shows, always, always, always.
And I'd go to parties and, you know, it was fun.
You know, people were drinking and having a good time, but I wasn't really into drinking.
And I could say whatever I wanted to say without it.
I think I just always had that kind of wild side in me that I didn't need to drink in the order.
So you're still getting in fight even though you're not drinking because drinking leads to a lot of fighting.
Yeah, so I don't have that excuse.
The, yeah, I pulled the fire alarm in our building because he was done with finals and you was celebrating.
I remember, wake jumping out of bed because I need my sleep because you grow when you sleep.
Running out there and grabbing him and hitting him.
Those kinds of, that kind of stupidity.
He stuck a key through my cheek.
It was actually this cheek.
I remember things someone said, you have blood on your face.
I said, he's got his blood on my face.
Not like, you're bleeding.
This kind of thing, just young stupidity, 19 years old, or 18 years old.
And then what happened was, and that summer she moved home.
And I decided to stay in that little town of Ilevista.
And I didn't pay rent.
I just, skateboarder, just, these, and none of these houses are locked.
Just stay in one.
So I was staying in one.
I was delivering bagels for the bagel cafe driving,
then I will truck in the fourth or third year in the morning.
Come home, sleep, get up and go find a barbecue and hang out.
skateboard.
I do whatever, work out.
And it was fourth of July, 1994, remember this very well.
And we went to go, the store to pick up some stakes.
We were driving back.
And there were some guys coming out of the house with a bunch of stuff.
Surfboard, skateboards.
And one of the guys in our car said the usual thing.
He said, oh, let's get on.
Let's beat him up.
I was like, no, no, that's not how you do it.
Right?
And if you just say, I'm going to beat you up.
This is the bad tactics.
Right?
Here I'm talking to you guys about fighting.
This isn't music.
That also is the first podcast I've ever been except the one with Joe Runger.
I'm the smallest person in the room.
Joe's a big guy as you know.
He's thick.
So what ended up happening is there was a big fight between a bunch of guys and us and the whole thing.
And it was like knives and bottles.
And it worked out in the sense that no one got cut or killed.
Please show it up.
And I'll never forget this.
The cop came up to me and he said, and big crowded assembled and people.
And I'd done it.
Were these guys when they were walking?
Were they were they jacking stuff?
Yeah, they were stealing stuff.
They were stealing stuff.
And you know, and I hit a guy and the whole thing.
And like, and I ended up on my feet and then there was a huge crowd.
And a couple of guys I was with ran away.
He was like, let's get him.
But then when they come out with bottles of knives, it's like,
out of town.
And so, please show it up and I'll never forget this.
The cop said, good job.
And I remember feeling just the worst sunken feeling in my stuff.
I thought like, good job.
I mean, first I just, it all kind of fell into place.
I was like, I'm 19 girlfriends gone.
And I don't have a job.
I'm not doing well in school.
I'm getting, I'd actually been thrown out of the dorms for fighting.
And some other just stupidity.
And you know, I'm getting in fights.
I could have cut someone and someone cut me.
I could be dead or in jail.
It could be like one of the stories from the market era of the guys that didn't make it.
That didn't escape where they're just hung out drinking and partying and fighting all day.
And I remember going back to my place at night and thinking, this is it.
Like this is the line.
I need to do something.
I'm basically a loser.
And I was a total loser.
And I thought, what am I going to do?
Well, I hadn't seen minuses and d's in all my classes up until then at Santa Barbara.
Barely finished high school.
And so, I decided to take a leave of absence.
I did not drop out.
I took a leave of absence.
I moved home.
And I went to Fuhill College Community College.
And I didn't talk to any of my old friends from the skateboarding world.
It was just two familiar with a bunch of things.
I didn't talk to my family.
I lived in a little apartment and I just started studying.
I thought, what am I good at?
Okay.
I can remember things pretty well.
I like to read.
This is it.
And I remember thinking my dad's an academic.
So I thought, you know, I'm not going to do this.
That'll just validate what he does and his choices.
Well, that's stupid.
All right. So I started working and I did okay in my courses to art history.
I told you it took psychology.
Then I went back to Santa Barbara.
And I had this reputation in Santa Barbara at that time as a guy that was fun to have at parties.
Because something fun was going to happen.
You know, something wild was going to happen or there'd be a big fight.
You know, you're the guy getting noseed up to the front to take the damage or do the damage for entertaining other people's entertainment.
So I went back and I lived in the studio Plaza apartments.
I still have a photo of that door because it has great meaning for me.
I lived in the corner there.
I lifted weights.
I studied like a maniac.
And I did not drink or party except once a month.
I'd allow myself to go out.
And I would really, you know,
I would just stay out all night party.
But over time when I realized this, I didn't like it because then it made the rest of the week that much harder.
So in those years, I discovered a guy an amazing person.
He was Harry Carlisle, former Navy guy in Sanley, Randall Abertory and taught classes.
And he was teaching about, at the time there was no neuroscience.
He was teaching about psychology and biology.
They called it bio-psychology.
And about how depression was based on these things called neurotransmitters.
And it's a frania which I'd seen some of in this, you know, in my years.
No neuroscience didn't exist at this time.
There was no field of neuroscience.
There was a chemistry physiology.
But so this is the mid-90s now, 94.95 or so.
And he was teaching about the brain and how it works.
And then he was talking about thermal regulation.
And he was talking about why people die at Raves.
He said, I heard of these things called Raves.
And the people taking this drug and he break down the structure of MDMA,
ecstasy and explain how it would disrupt the hypothalamus and one's perception about how it was.
And this is why people would overheat even if they were pouring water on themselves.
As a little scientific factoid, when you're overheating in the desert or while training,
you might think, I'll put a coltal over my head or the back of my neck.
Well, that's like putting a coltal on a thermostat.
Because you have a thermostat in your brain.
What happens when you put a coltal on the thermostat?
The thermostat turns on the heat.
That's how you overheat and die.
Turns out the best way to dump heat is through the palms of your hands and the bottoms of your feet.
You have a special vignus portals called AVA's, where you can dump heat.
So if you want a cool off fast, in fact, you can save your life by getting the bottoms of your bare feet.
Or the palms of your hands into cool water.
We can talk about how this can be leveraged for training because there's some amazing research on this.
So I was learning about thermal regulation.
And I was learning about drugs of abuse and why some of my friends were addicts, probably,
was this pathways related to dopamine, et cetera, et cetera.
I thought, oh, who is this guy?
So I started talking to him and he drove a black truck and he was in shape.
And I thought, I want to be like this guy.
And so I started hanging around his lab and he would drink black coffee.
And he let me listen to whatever music I wanted after hours.
And we started doing experiments.
I started working in a laboratory.
And he pulled me aside at one point and he said, you know, you seem to have some proficiency for this.
You know, if you go to graduate school, they'll pay you.
And I thought, they pay you to do this.
And he said, yeah, they'll pay you to do it.
He didn't tell me how much they pay you.
But basically what happened was, make a long story short.
No more fighting was never into the drugs or alcohol, as I mentioned.
I was not going to get back to the other with the girlfriend.
But I went from a CD student to a straight A student.
I got to be plus my senior year and it still pisses me off.
But that was in neuro anatomy, which is now what I teach to medical students.
It became my favorite topic.
I went on to take multiple courses and it's always that one thing that didn't quite get you.
I think Dan Gable talks about this in wrestling is the one guy that I think it is where it's gum beat out.
And then pinned him or beat him by point.
That one guy that teaches you the most.
Right.
A student went on to graduate with honors, went to graduate school first at Berkeley and then did my PhD.
And then did my postdoc at Stanford and so on and so forth.
I will say over the years, I kept in touch with various people in the skateboard community.
And then when I was a postdoc, which is kind of like a residency between your PhD and
Professorship, I was at Stanford and I was working extremely hard.
I've always had a capacity to work long hours.
Actually, I have a, I hope the insurance companies don't mind me saying this, but it would only hurt me.
I have a mutation in a, and then the dream-over-lated gene.
So I probably make a little bit, I probably have the capacity to make a little bit more adrenaline.
Then most, I can get by on very little sleep, at least for a couple nights.
I'm guessing a lot of team guys might have this.
It's a pretty common mutation about 12% of males have it.
So I can do fine with one night no sleep.
Second night, I'm kind of falling apart a bit.
But if I need to take a one hour nap and bounce right back in, I'm good.
I don't recommend it.
I try and get my good sleep now.
But so I was just work work, work, lift lift, lift, run, run, run, just repeat.
So you graduate from Santa Barbara?
Yeah, that's right.
And then you go from there to Berkeley?
I go to Berkeley and the first week at Berkeley,
Rances playing at the Greek theater.
Oh, how are you?
So I'm there and I'm still doing that.
I'm still in it, but I'm not, but I'm the guy now on the side lines.
Just happy to be there.
And then eventually I did my PhD, my graduate advisor moves.
I went up to Davis and I worked for an incredible woman up there who is just a really, really good scientist.
She was just extremely rigorous.
Give me a lavin, some keys to the lab, show me where things were and said, listen,
I'm going to have a couple kids in the next few years.
And the best thing I can do for you is to be available when you need me, but figure it out.
Don't burn the lab down, don't kill yourself, go for it.
And so it's like, you kidding me?
There was no one else in there.
I thought it, and this was perfect.
Ten foil on the windows, lock the doors, ranted blasting all day, ignore the knocks on the door and just do experiments experiments.
We published ten papers together.
We'll kind of experiment.
Okay, so it can be an example.
So at the time, I'm thinking like,
Eight great, I was like, sure, I drew gin peroxide.
So yeah, little disclaimer.
Now my laboratory mainly focuses on humans, but the time we're using animal models.
So at the time, and listen, I have mixed feelings about this for the time we were doing experiments on carnivores in
the past, including cats and ferrets, because they have a visual system that's very immature,
so we were studying neuroplasticity, which is the brain's ability to change and response to experience.
Really trying to define fundamental principles that do carry over to humans.
And we were, I was also, there's a primary center at Davis, where it's doing work on non-human primates, and Macack monkeys.
Big, dangerous monkeys that you wouldn't want to be left alone with, but I was working, trying to understand embryonic development, so working on feed on Macacks.
So, again, to do surgeries on feed on Macacks, and I loved working with my hand,
I also discovered something in science, which is sitting and learning from books is great,
but I have a lot of energy, and I need to put that someplace, and doing careful
dissections for hours and hours was a great way to, I learned how to take all that energy that normally would go into big movements,
and just channel it into total focus.
I could spend eight hours down the microscope, just doing dissections and listening to music and doing dissections.
In fact, I used to play this game where I tried to get as ramped up and alert as possible by listening to music and drinking coffee,
and then just do my dissections as slowly as possible.
And it's to all this crazy stuff.
And in those years, I was still going to shows there was a place up in Sacramento, rough place,
and I started going to see Roger Morene, the disasters play.
And, you know, as you know, agnostic front, it's only fair to call it the great Roger Morene.
I'd go to these shows where I was legitimately afraid.
You know, I'm like, I'm like, I'm not, at that point, I'm, last thing I want to do is get into a fight.
I'm just legitimately afraid of what's going to happen.
This was at a place called the Bord Walk, and there was a place up on Broadway, the Colonial Theatre,
and they would do Mexican wrestling one night with the hands dipped in glass.
And then they would do punk rock shows.
I got to see the transplants, which is to Marmstrom, Travis Barker, and bands like that play in a little tiny theater.
And I thought, life is so good.
I'm working on my PhD, we're publishing papers, I still have arms in this world, although I didn't know any of the characters.
And then eventually I graduated.
I got my PhD and went and did a post-doc at Stanford.
And that was a problem.
I was back in the early location.
There's a thing in neuroscience called Condition Place, Preference, where something really good happens for you someplace.
You really like it.
And your body goes into a great state when you're there.
There's also a condition place of version.
And here I am back in Palo Alto and thing cash.
This was kind of a dark place for me.
Forget the well, trimmed lawns, and everything.
This place is not, I'm starting to get depressed.
So I moved to San Francisco.
And one day I got this idea, I thought, wait a second,
thrashers right over the hill.
Why aren't I there?
So I have a friend that was at a sibling magazine to thrash her, which is Slap magazine.
It's now closed up, but I got any mark lightly that I grew up with.
Now works for Apple.
Called up Mark and said, hey, you know what?
Can I do some work for you guys?
You said, sure.
So do you not take photos?
And I said sure.
That's not true, but I said, I know how to take a photo.
So he said, well, you can always do music stuff.
So I started going to shows and taking pictures and doing write-ups and traveling a little bit for that for some extra cash.
What year is this?
2005 to 2010.
So there's some publications and thrashers.
People can, you might be able to find the my own.
So I covered Marraine, the disasters bouncing souls.
Love those guys.
I remember when Roger Marraine went to jail and I don't forget what year it was, but I remember going to.
They would have like benefit shows to raise money.
I don't know.
Roger, I don't know what we were doing.
Well, the thing is down for the cause.
I would say that much.
Well, the thing about Roger is that it's really interesting.
And I don't even know if he'd remember who I was.
I became friendly with, I think it was his base player Reese.
He was for the disaster's great band by the way, I loved the band, like the Janey Hawksong and some of those are just amazing songs.
And I remember you seem Marraine when I was a kid and his neck was like,
you still have a bulldog mastiff a few years ago.
Costillars and Costillan never lifted weights, right?
But Roger's neck is huge, right?
And this is a guy that probably didn't lift weights.
It's just huge because he's just born that way.
And you know, like you guys are big dudes.
It's like there's certain people that you know, risk-surf thick, neck is big and all that.
And I went like, Marraine and like, Marraine could sing happy birthday.
And it would be like, you know, you know, his voice just comes from so deep inside his body.
It's just a beautiful and amazing to see what he can do and the physicality of it.
And so I did a thing for thrash on Marraine, the disaster,
the transplants stuff, bouncing souls was going to show getting 500 to 1000 bucks per article,
which at the time is a postdoc.
You know, pretty good because life was expensive.
And when you're a postdoc, you're agitated.
You're not making much money at all.
And this is because at this time you're also at Stanford, you said,
that's right.
Doing what?
That's all.
It's a postdoc.
So when you finish your PhD, you typically you five years where it's just pure research before you go get a hopefully get a professorship.
So I would go to show,
stay up most of the night, then come back to Stanford, sleep under my bench, wake up and start doing experiments.
And shower at the gym.
And so in this is the thing, you know, those old habits die hard.
You said a lot of those are, as you mentioned, a lot of those early years, the decision making and the habits.
I'm carryover.
And fortunately, I was able to to move the, the good ones forward, the good habits that is.
So when I was a PhD student, I thought, why pay rent?
There's a building here with a shower.
It was a cage wash shower for the monkeys, but they never knew it was good.
So I was shower in there, or at the gym.
I'd brush my teeth in the sink and I'd sleep there.
I did that also as a postdoc.
And I confess, even eventually what happened was I finished my postdoc.
I was hired as a, what they call pre tenure professor, assistant professor at UC San Diego.
I got a house because at the time when the house is down here,
it was in normal heights and it was relatively inexpensive.
So when from no responsibility, no property, no nothing at a house, a bulldog, and a laboratory, my own.
But I think this was at UC San Diego.
UC San Diego, this is a B-2011.
And I thought, well, the commute from normal heights to UC San Diego is pretty far.
So I'm going to just put a couch in my office.
The dog was fine.
There's a field outside where I can take him out.
And so I would sleep in lab, I don't two nights a week.
And then eventually, and I did well there, my lab, I'm proud to say,
and the credit really goes to the people very hard working.
Published good papers had grants and my career really took off in neuroscience.
And then eventually I was recruited back to Stanford as a tenured professor,
which is where I've been now for about seven years.
And even then when I got back, I thought, well, why the housing in the Bay Area is crazy.
I looked at Costello, my bulldog, I was like, how can we move back in the lab?
So I stayed there until someone finally came along and said, this sends the wrong message.
Well, it actually sends the message that there should be better housing for faculty,
but I saved some money that way so that was able to eventually buy a small home.
So over the years, it's been consistently the same themes.
Work hard, train, keep out of any kind of mischief, which is easy to do now.
I value so many things in my life. I wouldn't want to do that.
And then just trying to bring the spirit of skateboarding and punk rock music to the whole thing of science.
And then the piece of that where it kind of wraps around is that a few years ago I decided I'd write a book,
but then I decided I didn't want to write a book and so I started going on podcast, Joe and Varus and the others.
And you know, there was this guy, Lex Friedman, of course, and he said, maybe should start a podcast.
So I started the podcast and when I did it, I looked to a couple of communities. I thought, who can just put things together really well?
That really understand aesthetics and the DIY, you know, do it yourself, kind of,
mantra and get it right. And so I looked to a guy named Rob Moore who produces the fight podcast with Teddy Atlas,
and who comes from the world of PR, but also those a lot about the fight world.
And I went to Mike playback, who's a famous skateboard photographer, to the pictures of Danny Way jumping the Great Wall China.
And the Great Wall China, DC shoes, Nike skateboarding, and Mike just knows how to do the kind of photographs that I like,
which are black and white and very, you know, looked, there's a common theme.
And so that's the podcast. And you know, people always ask why do you always wear a black shirt?
And you know, I've been wearing a black shirt to work for 25 years.
This isn't a costume for the podcast. I've just always addressed this way, done it this way.
And the wonderful thing about social media is you get in touch with people like you. And I should say,
for me, it's a real honor to be here because when that 20, 15, 15, 16,
I was living with my girlfriend at the time, we'd met in San Diego.
My ex girlfriend now, but we're on good terms, I can tell this story.
And there was a kind of weird, maybe, seal theme in our household, because the guy she'd been with before was a team guy.
Uh-oh.
Right.
And so it was like, I'm back in high school again. You know, this guy's, I won't say who it is,
but he seems like a really nice guy. But team guy, and she was doing CrossFit with a bunch of team guys.
And so here I am like the doebies I exist.
I lived with, and do all that. But you know, our first, her first party or gathering where all these guys come around like,
once again, I'm the smallest person in the room.
I'm a scientist. I'm used to being the biggest guy in the room.
Smaller's kind of real good guys as you all are.
But what ended up happening was I was an avid Tim Ferriss podcast listener.
And I remember looking at the picture and it was your,
your grill looking at me. And I showed her and I said,
uh, I said, this guy, it was just on Tim Ferriss. And she goes,
well, if you're going to draw a team guy, that's the guy you draw.
And I thought, well, there's a lot behind that statement.
Let's not, I'm not going to ask why.
Um, so in any case, uh, I love that podcast. And it was, you know, when I lived here in San Diego,
I was involved a little bit in fitness and martial arts at a real,
superficial level. And you guys would come in and, um,
you know, beat everybody up and, uh, and then go, go off laughing and smiling and
leave the rest of us, mirror mortals to think about what just happened.
And I'm just kidding. Basically what you guys would do,
come in and take over bars.
Well, that's true. Um, and, uh,
and so I learned which bars not to drink at,
not because I was going to get in any mischief with anybody.
I know, you know, but because, um, you know,
they're only, uh, some, how do I say this correctly?
It's a, it's a, uh, resource allocation issue.
So anyway, I've been running my lab for a long time now.
The podcast is a newer thing we've had about a year and a half.
But the themes of skateboarding punk rock music, they, they are not just part of it.
I think this will make sense to you guys as it, uh, they're, they're in me, right?
That they're, they're wired into my nervous system.
And I'm, uh, feel really honored that to be here and also that this skateboard community
has, uh, reimbraised me with open arms and in touch with a lot of those guys,
Tony Hawk, Danny Way, Mike Playback, and there's so many names and, and people.
Um, it's an amazing community because skateboarding and punk rock music.
I don't know about other things because that's only what I know.
But odd, but really special communities because you can be nine years old and hanging out with
people that are in the 30s.
And so you can learn a lot for better or for worse.
But it's also a community that, especially more and more, is really starting to,
they take care of each other in a way that I think is probably not present in other communities.
It can be harsh too.
I mean, if you screw up, they're going to let everybody know.
So maybe some parallels with the teams.
Yeah.
Uh, so that kind of brings us through your sort of educational system and what you've been learning
and learning along the way and, um, I want to grab some of that knowledge, you know, of what you've learned about,
you know, how to be better, how to be smarter, how to be stronger, how to be faster, how to be more healthy.
Um, because all those things are things that, you know,
I've been trying to do my whole life as well.
And, uh, obviously not done it on an academic level, but really through trial and error.
And, and also being surrounded by a bunch of people that were always, you know,
I had that, had that same kind of mindset.
We were very lucky in the SEAL teams.
We had guys that would go way down the rabbit hole on some random,
form of exercise or some random diet or what, what, what, what, what, what,
some random thing that it would get spread.
And, and then we, really, I would say around maybe 2005, 2006,
we started really bringing in professionals.
Actually, it was earlier in that.
We'd always bring in professionals, but so we'd bring in professionals that were really good at their designated field.
So I feel like I got very lucky with some of that as well.
But, um, obviously you're, you're a living experiment on this stuff,
and then you have the academics to back it up.
So let's talk about some of this stuff.
Um, and I've listened to a bunch of your stuff, like, you know,
and, and anyone that wants to go deep on this, trust me.
You can go deep listening to your podcast.
I mean, you can go real deep.
Yeah, I always say if nothing else will cure in somebody,
because, uh, you listen to it, you know, not out,
but, um, yeah, we do go to detailed.
I've had the great fortune of working with some units in special operations,
doing, uh, talking about physiology and using physiology.
Um, yeah, these are tools that over the years I've used,
but most of what we cover on the podcast and what we can talk about now,
um, are things that come from other laboratories.
This is one thing I truly enjoy is talking about my own work and research,
but a lot of what has been wonderful for me is bringing on expert guests
and connecting with people who are experts say in thermal regulation.
Something is, I mean, the ability to adjust one's temperature
through some dedicated actions is the difference between being able to do more work
or no more work physically and mentally.
We can talk about that.
But in terms of things that really enhance performance,
we can talk about the, what I, there are two ways to think about biology.
One are modulators and the others are mediators.
So there are some things that you can do that will strongly modulate your ability
to do lots of other things.
Let's just give an example.
If I sleep to private echo for two days,
his ability to focus is going to be diminished.
Relative to what it would be if he had slept well for, for two nights.
Why?
Well, sleep and it's various outputs,
modulate attention, but it doesn't mediate attention.
You can't really use sleep in real time to enhance attention.
Okay.
A fire alarm will modulate my attention, but it doesn't mediate it.
So we can know modulators and mediers.
The important thing to understand is that there are certain foundational behaviors,
do's and don'ts that set the stage for you to be better everything.
So a lot of times people will say, how can I lift more focus better,
remember things better? It's like, well, let's think about the foundation of that.
And that's always going to come back to two elements,
and that's sleep and what I call non-sleep-deep rest.
So sleep is the fundamental practice or part of our 24-hour cycle,
where if you don't get it on a consistent basis,
you are downregulating your ability to do everything.
Metabolism is screwed up, immune system is screwed up, etc.
However, it is not the case if you get a one-night-spad sleep
or that if you're not sleeping perfectly, that you can't perform well.
But let's talk about sleep, because I think it's important.
The goal for most people, unless you're pulling vampires shifts on deployment
or you're shift worker and thank you shift workers, we'll talk about shift work,
you should try and get really good sleep 80% of the time,
8% of the nights of your life.
But that's the point of the day,
but the point is that there are a couple things that you can do.
First of all, every cell in your body has a circadian rhythm,
meaning every cell has a 24-hour circadian clock that's regulated by genes.
Think of your body as a bunch of millions of clocks
and you will line those clocks to a single time.
This is why when you travel overseas, your gut goes off,
or it's more easily you get sick, or you're thinking isn't quite right.
The clocks aren't in alignment. They're not in train, as we say.
Number one practice for everything, sleep, especially is trying to get some natural light
in your eyes within an hour of waking up.
If you wake up before the sun, turn on a bunch of bright lights,
and then get sunlight in your eyes once it comes out.
If there's dense cloud cover, there are still more photons, light energy coming through that cloud cover,
then there are coming from artificial lights.
So try and get five to ten minutes without sunglasses outside in the morning,
once the sun is out, most days, if not all days.
This has an outsized effect on a number of things.
First of all, it modulates the timing of what's called the cortisol pulse.
Once every 24 hours, you're going to get a boost in cortisol,
big spike in cortisol to healthy boost.
It sets your temperature rhythm in motion, sets your level of alertness,
your level of focus and your mood.
You want that cortisol pulse to happen as early in the day as once.
What's triggering the cortisol pulse?
The cortisol pulse is naturally in train by these genetic programs
to happen once every 24 hours,
so anchor it to the period where you see bright light.
A late shifted cortisol pulse, so imagine the kid that wakes up and spends the morning and bed
or you're spending the morning bed in your texting or your indoors and you're typing on the computer,
that's not enough light to accomplish what I'm talking about.
Then you go outside around noon or one.
You're in what's called the circadian dead zone,
which is the timing which light arriving at the eyes can do certain things
but it can't time this pulse.
That means that cortisol pulse is going to come in the afternoon,
which means that your temperature rhythm is going to be shifted late,
and that's actually a signature of depression and anxiety and difficulty falling asleep.
These are from studies done by the Great Robert Sapolsky and David Spiegel,
my call is at Stanford.
You want that increase in cortisol to happen early in the day.
Basically, you wake up because your temperature goes up.
Let me ask you this. I have a sense for you. What time do you wake up?
Generally between, well, between 415 and 430.
Okay, so for most people it's going to be a little bit later,
I think probably, but for you that means, so you're waking up
if it's because of an alarm, it's because of an alarm.
But if that's your natural wake up time now without an alarm,
that means that your temperature is starting to rise at that time.
That's why you wake up.
That temperature increase triggers that cortisol release.
Now, and that's why some people wake up right before they're alarm clock.
It's this cortisol pulse. Okay?
And two hours before that, so for you, approximately 230 in the morning,
is what we call your temperature minimum.
It's when your temperature is lowest that it's ever going to be in the 24 hour cycle.
If you view light within the four hours after that temperature minimum,
it will tend to wake you up and will keep you in train to the normal cycle.
However, if you were to wake up at 130 in the morning and see very right light,
it would delay your circadian clock.
It would make it so that the next night you'd want to go to bed later and wake up later.
And the way it does that is by changing your core body temperature.
So the way it works is you wake up because of an increasing core body temperature.
That increasing core body temperature triggers that increase in cortisol.
And by viewing light at that time, you in train, you ensure that it happens at the same time the next day.
Wait, if I woke up at 2 o'clock in the morning and saw bright light, that would delay your clock.
So when you wake up at 430 in the morning, it's because your clock is in your,
the clock's of your body are in train to their match to this cortisol pulse.
So viewing bright light in the morning anchors,
when we say in train, it, it, it, it, it,
through a circuit that involves cells in the eye and cells in the hypothalamus,
which then talk to the rest of the cells of the body through a signal, a peptide that's released.
Make sure that the temperature starts rising, goes up, up, up, up, up, up, up.
And some time around 2 or 3 in the afternoon, you're going to hit your temperature maximum.
You might feel a little sleepy at that time, but that's actually the time in which you're,
your, your, your, all your systems are kind of revving at the, at the maximum capacity.
And then it's going to start to drop and start to drop drop drop drop.
Now that drop in temperature eventually will be a full 1 to 3D degrees below.
What your temperature maximum and that's when you're going to get sleepy and fall asleep.
This is why it's important to keep the room cool at night to fall asleep.
Why keep the room cool? Well, you can always put warm blankets on and put your hand out
or your foot out because you actually dump heat through the palms of your hands and the palms of your feet.
But if you're in a hot room, you'd have to have like an ice bath next to you to put your hand in.
That's not feasible.
I guess I, I live in a luxurious scenario.
I can't imagine that there's like, what kind of person is in a situation where they don't see the sun?
Oh, so that's horrible.
Well, I, I, I, I, I, I might last being on a submarine.
That's horrible being on a ship sometimes you get stuck down below decks.
And I remember this is interesting.
I remember I would have like the urge to go out and go outside.
Like we would, we would, we would, you know, being a seal between on a ship.
You don't actually have a job on the ship.
You're just kind of riding the ship.
So you'd have this urge to go outside and we go outside and PT.
We go outside.
Believe it or not, we go outside and hacky sack.
One of my, two great hacky sack.
I, I guess.
But not listening to fish.
We weren't listening to fish, but I, I'm, I'm gonna tell you, we played so much hacky sack that I kind of hurt one of my knees.
It's got to get through.
So we're, in, yeah, inward rotation of the head.
But we wanted to be outside.
I remember having a distinct urge to want to get outside.
So it's really sad if people are in scenarios where they aren't seeing the sun for four hours upon wake up.
That's kind of crazy.
And blue light has been demonized and we can talk about light later in the evening because you don't want to get too much bright light in your eyes later in the evening if you want to improve sleep.
But it does not work as well or as quickly through a window or through a windshield or through sunglasses.
I glasses and contacts are fine.
If you think about what those do, they actually focus light to the retina.
So that's why they're there.
They'll help you.
Even if there's UV protection, many people are waking up and they're just spending time indoors and they're putting on sunglasses getting in their car and driving or there's cloud cover and they think there's no sun out.
I don't mean that you actually have to stare at the sun.
Never stare at any light.
So bright it's going to damage you.
Please don't.
And blink as necessary.
But the indirect rays from the sun trigger these cells in the eyes called melanops and ganglion cells.
These ganglion cells, these are neurons.
They send a signal to your hypothalamus.
They also then the hypothalamus releases this peptide which is a wake up signal for your whole brain and body.
And sets a timer for the onset of melatonin release 16 hours.
Later, melatonin being the hormone that makes you sleepy and makes you want to go to sleep.
So you can imagine what happens if you don't get that light until a few hours later everything shifted.
And then you want to go to go to go to why you're wide awake at 1130 or 12 and everything's messed up.
The other thing is that you can get bright light from electronic devices early in the day, but it's not enough.
You need photons from sunlight.
Now if you live in Scandinavia and the depths of winter if you're up in like, you know, try a high mirror or all hooser something like, okay fine.
Don't buy it in expensive daytime simulator.
Get one of these LED light boxes for drawing.
They're very inexpensive in comparison.
You can find them on Amazon.
I don't have a relationship to any of these brands, but they're easy to find 20 30 bucks.
But that on your desk and just look at that thing for a few minutes in the morning.
Not as good, but better than being in the darkness.
Then when the sun's out, get outside.
Now this is a huge, huge effect for the following reason.
The signal that arrives from the eyes to the hypothalamus also triggers the release of the neuromodulator dopamine.
We hear about dopamine as a feel good molecule.
Dopamine dopamine, dopamine hits.
But dopamine's main role in the brain and body is to drive motivation, craving and pursuit.
It is not the molecule of pleasure.
It is the molecule of drive.
It is life force.
And we'll talk later about how dopamine and testosterone have a close relationship.
Dopamine is actually the molecule from which adrenaline,
epinephrine, is manufactured.
And you may notice you said you we crave sun.
It also does make you feel good.
Here's why if you think about seasonally breeding animals, let's think about the architect fox.
Well, the architect fox in winter is white.
But in the summertime has darker pelage.
It actually there's a pathway going from sunlight to dopamine to melanin production in the skin and fur.
So animals that transition from light color to dark color, that's all made by dopamine.
Guess what else happens?
The gonads grow.
There are animals that I've worked on in the laboratory and that also in humans,
it's now been shown in a beautiful study that people who get 20 to 30 minutes of light on their skin.
This was a stunning Israel.
So they were an appropriate amount of clothing, but they're sleeveless, no hat, no sunglasses.
They were told to go outside.
20 to 30 minutes, three times a week, just in the sunshine.
Ideally, they were shorts also.
They measure testosterone and estrogen and men and women.
Significant increases in both and all the associated things of increased passion.
Bob, Bob, Bob, Bob, that is what they measured in the study.
Why?
Well, it turns out that light to the eyes, but also light to the skin.
The skin is an endocrine organ.
It's not just something to tattoo and hang earrings from and put clothing on.
It actually, there's a pathway involving a molecule called P53 and the keratinocytes.
So these skins cells that when sunlight, when UVB, ultraviolet blue light penetrates the skin
because it can penetrate the skin superficially, triggers these keratinocytes to stimulate a pathway
that releases dopamine in the brain and body.
So you feel better when you're getting light in your eyes and on your skin, and you're increasing
testosterone and epinephrine and dopamine increase.
That's why you feel good in the summer months.
People in skin may be a know this.
This is kind of spring fever.
In the winter months, you want to go through every bit of effort to double or triple the amount of time
that you're spending outside in the morning.
So instead of 10 minutes, make it 30 minutes.
You can read outside.
You can do, you could even be on your phone, but we'll talk about why that might not be optimal.
In addition to that, there's a study done out of China now, tens of thousands of subjects,
looking at the incidence of myopia, near-sightedness in kids, but now this is also true in adults.
When you look at things up close, the eyeball actually starts to elongate over time.
And the image then focuses in front of the neural part of the eye and things are blurry.
That's why they call it near-sighted.
It's actually far-sighted.
It would be the image falls behind.
So it's just pure optics, it's falling in front.
Coming myopic.
Spending time outside and getting UVB exposure during the day can offset in some cases reverse myopia.
So all these kids are spending time indoors on screens and reading on books,
but not getting any outdoor time.
Sirius Promen, now adults are doing this too.
The pandemic was, there was also a pandemic of myopia and depression that was simply because people were indoors too much.
So get that sunlight early on.
They shut down the freaking beaches in the sandier.
I mean, it was crazy.
Hey, I went to college, I was an English major and there was one semester.
I took five English classes, five English classes, it was a dumb move.
But whenever I'm trying to plot out my classes,
I could go to Jiu-Jitsu for like three, four hours next.
So anyways, I ended up taking five classes and so I was reading like on the weekends.
I would read like eight, ten hours a day.
And yeah, that's when I realized, oh, if you don't stop and take a break,
you're like, I'd get done and walk outside and my vision would be blurry.
And because I was just working at that close range for five, six, seven, eight hours horrible.
Yeah, you definitely want to get a horizon view every once in a while.
When you look at a horizon, unless you're tracking something on the horizon,
you naturally go into panoramic vision.
And this is a great way to learn how to do panoramic vision we were talking about before.
In an environment like this where it's close quarters,
I can look at you and then I can dilate my gaze consciously.
And you don't know, I'm doing it.
As we talked about earlier, it comms the nervous system.
The nice thing is it's also covert.
You can be doing public speaking.
You can be meeting somebody where you're starting to feel a little tense or whatever.
And you can dilate your gaze or you can learn to,
I think it's a great skill to be able to dilate and contract the aperture of vision.
And a horizon will teach you kind of the feeling of having dilated vision.
And then you can kind of accomplish that without looking at a horizon.
So yes, if you're looking at things up close,
they say for about every 45 minutes of doing that,
you want 20 minutes of long distance viewing.
That's very hard for most people to get in this kind of work environment.
So one thing that works really well to reset the eyes and the nervous system throughout the day is
walks are great and jogs are great.
Why? Well, turns out that self-generated optic flow.
So not a peloton, sorry, work, not a treadmill, sorry,
but walking or running or cycling or something where visual images are going by you on all sides while you're in effort.
Some beautiful papers, now five papers showing that when we are in self-generated optic flow,
the amygdala, sight in the brain that's commonly associated with fear,
but it's mainly a sight of threat detection and anxiety,
is the activity in the amygdala suppressed.
I think about this a lot when I read your book and hear stories from the teams of this notion of having a forward center of mass.
And how often harder it stays still, right?
I know you guys don't have a retreat button,
but it's harder to stay still than it is sometimes to move forward.
That forward movement can actually calm us.
And so a lot of people there on the precipice of something scary or challenging will retreat or pause,
but forward movement actually suppresses the activity of the amygdala.
This again has been shown in humans and non-human primates and in small animal models.
And it makes really good sense because forward ambulation, forward movement,
is incompatible with the fear response in many ways.
And so one of the big discoveries in our field of neuroscience last few years was
laboratories not exploring the topic of fear at all.
They were actually looking at eye movements and motor movements found when they did brain wide imaging that they're
the sights in the brain that quiet down when animals are people are moving forward.
And the fear centers shut down.
So if you find yourself afraid, this is, I imagine the kid who, I mean, handrails are always dangerous.
You can, you can end your, your family lineage with handrails.
I've seen people do that.
I won't name names, so there's a guy we grew up with who unfortunately, you know,
hopefully he successfully reproduced at some point,
but he's seen some hard stacks on handrails.
It's not pretty.
But it's always going to be harder to sit up there at the top of the ramp thinking about dropping in.
Stop dropping in.
Gotta go.
When I was a kid, Gary Hall, the guy mentioned earlier said, I'm going to,
you put your tail down on the deck.
I'm in the top of the ramp that is, I'm going to skate from one end of the deck to the other.
And if I come back the third time and you haven't dropped in, I'm pushing you in.
And I saw a lot of kids get pushed in.
Now a dad did that to his kid on YouTube and I think was punished for child abuse.
So now days, the rules have changed, but back then you were dropping in because you didn't want to get pushed in.
And then he gets, it's always easier to drop in than stand there and wait.
What do I do?
And that's the suppression, the amygdala.
When you go into forward action, the fear centers of the brain shut down.
So this is like another little connect of the dots and echoes.
Because he's heard me talk about this a million times.
It's like, hey, when you're waiting to do something, you're going to be more scared.
You're going to build up.
You need to step forward.
You need to start taking action.
Take an action is a way to overcome the feeling of hesitation in fear that you have in your body.
So now I have another physiological backup.
To my instincts.
That's good.
So we got up in the morning.
We got some light.
This is interesting because I wake up early morning.
I work out.
But I go for a run by the time I'm going for a run, the sun's out.
Perfect.
I never, and the sun might not be fully out.
It's going to ask like, does it need to be hitting my skin or can it be kind of below the horizon?
Are we good?
On a cloud list day, it can be anywhere.
On a day with more clouds, you probably want to try an orient toward where the sun might be and get out of the shade a little bit.
Just so you don't have to be out there for more than five ten minutes.
Okay.
I'm going on, you know, half an hour, 45 minute run.
Great.
So we got some light.
Yeah.
And by the way, interestingly, I don't, I wear sunglasses a lot.
And maybe that's bad.
I wear sunglasses.
Actually, almost all the time if I'm in the sun.
But when I go for a run in the morning, I never wear sunglasses because it's wet and all the cello stuff.
And you have a lot of sun here in San Diego. So you're getting a lot of photons all day long.
So there are a couple things about your practice that are perfectly designed. One is you're, there are a few things.
Let's just, let's just make it really simple for people.
The goal here is to increase body temperature in order to be awake and to decrease body temperature in order to be asleep.
If we stay with those themes, a lot of this will just fall into bins.
So you wake up, getting sunlight in your eyes will enhance the or bright artificial lights and then sunlight.
If you're up before the sun comes out, turn on brighter artificial lights.
If you want to be awake, right?
We'll enhance the cortisol pulse.
Cortisol is going to further increase body temperature, exercising will increase body temperature.
Somewhat paradoxically getting into a cold shower or cold water.
Everyone says, what must make you cold, right?
Well, if you stay in there a long time, you can't be hyperthermic, right?
But let's remember the thermostat example. You have a little airing of rain called the medial pre-optic area.
And if you make the surface of your body cold, guess what happens?
Corb body temperature goes up.
So getting into, so if you're going to do ice baths or cold showers, you can do it.
I would say do them some time better than not at all.
And then there's the whole thing relative to training we talked about.
But early in the day would be better.
Okay.
So I get back from my wrong and I'm going in the ice perfect.
So about five to seven minutes in the ice bath.
That's a good long ice bath.
But you guys are weamed in cold water.
You guys, I swim with a guy from the team's, but pop-up does it.
And we sometimes with a, for me it was a long swim.
One mile, no wet suit swim in the Pacific.
For me around the Santa Monica pier, and then run back.
For me, you know, I'm quaking like a alcoholic with delirium trements.
By the time I get to the coffee shop, we go in there.
Sometimes quaking like this and I'm convinced they think that we're all have delirium trements.
Yeah, that's a cold swim for me.
And I don't do it very much anymore. I should do it more often.
But what's interesting is he sees the water.
You guys like you see the what and it's like you want to get in the thing.
For me, there's a 10 minute break in period one.
Like, oh my god.
I don't know.
And then you have the triathletes on the beach and their wet suits going.
Are you really going to go in without wet suits?
And I was like, I didn't realize people going with wet suits.
But I just go numb when I hit the water.
But I never crave it.
I always think, all right, I'm going to do this because here I am.
And like, if I don't go in, I'll feel bad about myself and that kind of thing.
You're doing that serious negotiation.
Yeah, right.
Yeah, we all know how I will say.
I think about like for my for my eyes bath in the morning.
I've always think like, I feel so good when I get done that it's worth a little
shock of when you get in.
And actually you legitimately do get used to the.
The quote shock of getting in like if I go on a trip for a week.
And I come back and whatever I am, there's no there's no ice which is pretty normal.
There's not no ice baths around the world.
But when I come back that first day, maybe even the second day it's a little bit more of a little bit of a.
I'm having some freaking Andrew, human and conversation with myself.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no deliberation over hard work as a name.
This is a, thank you.
I deserve it.
You're absolutely right.
Yeah, it does not but certainly, but the so well, I'm glad you mentioned the mood enhancing effects.
So there's a beautiful paper published in the European Journal of Physiology in the year 2000,
which took people and had them sit.
They actually had them on lawn chairs in water of a pool.
It was a great way to run an experiment.
I would say people ask about cold showers.
There are not a lot of experiments on cold showers because think about it's very hard to control.
Is everyone under the shower the same way?
It's at a, you put someone up in water up to their neck.
It is, you know, you're saying, so it's experimental rigor that drives that.
But they had people get into reasonably cool water 60 degrees Fahrenheit.
So it's not that cold, but they had them stand for an hour.
Or they've had people get into very cold water.
So I think that 40 degrees for just 20 seconds.
Now here's what's really interesting.
That shock that you refer to is adrenaline, also called epinephrine.
And it is released from the adrenals, obviously, but also from a site in the brain called locustscerulious,
a little area of the brain stem that then sprinklers the rest of the brain with epinephrine
and wakes up the rest of the brain.
So that shock occurs in the brain and the body and actually the stuff in the body doesn't cross the blood brain bears.
So you're a two-part system.
We talk about this layer because when those two systems are aligned, it's beautiful.
When those two systems are out of alignment, that's not good.
So you get into cold water, that's the shock.
For the first 30 seconds for most people who are untrained,
your forebrain, which is controlling decision-making, is basically suppressed in its activity and other areas are ramped up.
So just knowing that.
Exactly.
Panic.
Just understand that passes.
Then what happens is when you get out of the cold, whether or not it's a longer period at 60 degrees or a short period,
I would hate to hear that people are only doing 20 seconds.
But maybe a minute to three minutes at 45 degrees or something.
There's a long arc release of dopamine and epinephrine.
That's what was shown in the study.
In humans.
Because people always go, well, it's just in mice.
No.
In humans.
And that long arc of dopamine leads to a near doubling or more of dopamine and epinephrine.
In my colleague on a Lemke's book called Dopamine Nation, she works on addiction runs our dual diagnosis.
Addiction clinic at Stanford.
She talked about a patient of hers that basically helped himself get over cocaine addiction by doing cold baths because it was the only thing that would give him the kind of dopamine release that even slightly mimic
his cocaine addiction and allowed himself to wean himself off with a healthier behavior.
Now, I'm not saying it's the equivalent of a drug-like cocaine, but I am saying that it's a better decision than a drug-like cocaine for obvious reasons.
So that mood enhancing effect that you feel afterwards, it's real.
It's based on a real neurochemical effect.
And that dopamine and epinephrine will combine with the temperature increase from cortisol plus light plus exercise.
All things that increase core body temperature.
Now you've got increased core body temperature.
You created a dopamine release epinephrine.
You've created a summer month inside your body.
In the, in, I don't care if you live in Minneapolis in the depths of winter or someplace even as cold as New Hampshire.
You are, you are creating summer in your body by doing that.
Now, if you live in San Diego or Los Angeles or Arizona and it's the summer and you're staying indoors and you're on your phone and you're not doing any movement until the afternoon.
Which is fine to exercise in the afternoon.
I realize there's some important benefits of that.
And you're laying in bed or you're just walking around the kitchen and putting on sunglasses and driving,
and we're, guess what, you're creating a Colorado winter inside of your body despite the fact that the sun is out.
So if you're wondering why you're slightly depressed, your metabolism is lower.
If your testosterone output is slightly lower than maybe like it to be, there could be other reasons too, of course.
But again, we're talking about modulators.
And not saying getting sun in your eyes is in the morning is going to make your testosterone perfect.
What I'm saying is you're, you're setting an internal milieu through things that increase core body temperature dopamine, up in effort, etc.
And that should be done relatively early in the day.
Now, we could sort of skip to something about temperature just to benefit people, kind of book in the opposite end of the day,
as the evening comes around, oh, I'm sorry, you asked a question.
I want to close the hatch on this about sun low in the sky.
You do not need to see the sun rise across the horizon.
However, what we're, the cells in the eye that trigger all this, the so-called melanops and ganglinks cells,
respond best to yellow blue contrast.
The next time you see a sun rise or a sunset, you will see the yellow blue contrast I'm referring to.
And what it's associated with is a low solar angle sunlight.
So if the sun is directly overhead, that yellow blue contrast isn't there.
Take a picture with your phone and everyone will see what I'm talking about.
So you don't have to see the sun rise or you're not getting up as early as jacco, that's fine.
But around, let's say you get up at 830 and you're outside by nine and the sun is low in the sky.
It's certainly not overhead.
You're still getting that yellow blue contrast that triggers the optimal activity of these cells.
Ideally, you would also get some sunlight in your eyes in the afternoon,
because it turns out you don't have one circadian clock, one master clocking brain.
You have two oscillators.
This gets a little bit tricky in the biophysics,
you have a morning oscillator and an evening oscillator.
For people who think about oscillators,
you geeks out there.
Two oscillators can predict many more things.
It's not, it's one plus one equals eight in this case.
Having two oscillators allows you to do a number of computations in the brain,
including timing the onset of sleep, metabolism, et cetera.
So try and get some sunlight in your eyes in the evening as well.
Here's why.
Even though I said early in the day,
you need sunlight and a lot of light to trigger these pathways.
Late in the day, retinal sensitivity goes up.
So if you see bright light in the evening,
and you're viewing too many screens and too much bright light in the evening,
it's very easy to wake your system up again.
So you want to really dim the lights in the evening.
You don't necessarily have to wear blue blockers.
In fact, if you're wearing blue blockers in the light is still too bright,
it won't make a difference.
Because it's broad spectrum light, we'll trigger these pathways.
So dim the lights in the evening, lower the temperature in your home,
or in the room that you sleep.
And evening would be, or afternoon would be a great time to,
I don't know, getting a sauna, take a hot shower,
take a hot bath, why?
Well, if you stay in a long, long time, of course, you'll heat up.
But again, if you heat up the external part of the body,
your core body temperature will drop after you get out of that sauna,
after you get out of that bath.
And when it comes to sauna, Dr. Rhonda Patrick's really the more proficient one here,
but we've talked about this literature.
There are a couple ways to use sauna.
Just mention in Hot Bads work also really well.
The study is showing enormous increases in growth hormone.
We're done the following way.
They had people get into a hot sauna for 30 minutes,
then get out for five minutes, 30 minutes, then five minutes out,
30 minutes that five minutes out for a total of two hours in the sauna,
between 175 and 210 degrees.
So how often?
Once a week.
Okay.
If they did it more often, the amount of growth hormone release went from a 16-fold increase,
which is pretty mega down to a two or three-fold increase.
First, got worse because you become heated-dapted.
And you can also become cold-adapted.
So we could talk about cold and how to use cold,
but remember, the more comfortable you get with a stimulus,
the less of an adaptation effect you're getting,
just like weights are running or anything else.
Now it is true that the more often that people did 20 minutes of sauna
at 174 to 210 degrees Fahrenheit,
I think that's 80 to 100 degrees Celsius, if I recall.
The more often they did that,
two or three times a week turned out to be better than one,
and five to seven times turned out to be better than two or three,
for lowering all cause mortality and death to cardiovascular events.
So we're talking about growth hormone release.
You want to do it every once in a while for many hours with breaks in the middle.
For improved overall health, getting blood flow,
you're talking doing it every night would be great.
So it depends on what your goal is.
The same thing with the water.
If you want to build resilience,
we'll make the stimulus as terrible as possible.
And here's a easy way to do it.
You're going to kind of poke fun at the tough guys on the internet,
who get into the ice bath and sit there really stoic.
We guess what? There's this thing called a thermal layer that builds up around you.
And we're sitting there really stoic.
You're not making it as cold as you could be, guys and gals.
Sift your body around a little bit.
Now it's cold.
To get those hands under, get those feet under and pedal those while keeping your mind calm.
It is considerably colder because you're breaking up that thermal layer.
It sucks.
Hence the way it was on out there on Coronado.
It sucks when you, because at my ice bath,
I have the little jet, my nest little jet on the side.
It's ionizing the water or whatever.
So it's shooting in and that side is super cold
because it's flow and faster body.
My other side I've got it perfectly still.
I got a thermal layer just keeping me all toasty warm on that right side.
Well, I would say, you know, it's fun to play with the ice bath
because you can, what you're doing is you can play with your relationship to adrenaline.
So the way I think about ice baths and cold showers and things like that,
I think it was a series of walls.
When you get into the shock that you describe,
that's a pulse of adrenaline in your brain and body.
But then, you know, you might ask yourself this question,
you know, if you can withstand something for a second,
why not a minute and if a minute, why not three hours?
Well, the reason is that adrenaline is released in pulse of tile fashion
and they, it compounds a one wave then another wave.
So it's, you're building, it's like an upward spiral of adrenaline.
It's not one, then down to zero one.
It's one down to 0.5 to 0.5.
So it's building on itself in the brain and body.
And as it circulates, it gets more and more painful until you go numb.
And then it gets easier.
Yes, you know.
So one thing to do is to just imagine and actually learn to sense the waves of adrenaline.
So maybe the first wave is just getting in the damn thing.
Maybe climbing, I think of that as one wall.
You climbed over that wall, now you're in.
Then you could say, well, I'm going to go 30 seconds.
And then maybe at 20 seconds, you'll feel that wall.
You thought 30, but that wall comes climb that wall.
What you'll start to notice is the walls actually
start getting further and further apart because adrenaline has this incredible
anti-inflammatory numbing quality to it.
So the walls actually get lower as time goes on.
But they start off very high.
That's the way that I think about the ice bath and that maps to the way that
adrenaline physiology actually functions.
So again, it's that first, those first steps of the hardest.
I think about this when I wake up in the morning and I don't want to do something.
I often see your watch staring at me on my phone.
I do.
And I think, ah, like, this is a big wall.
And I think, okay, but the walls are going to be diminishing over time.
And even if it gets harder, adrenaline bolsters you in that way.
It's a magical molecule.
So toward evening heat is going to be beneficial.
The other thing is dim the lights, obviously, because lights are serving as a wake-up signal.
And then, you know, a lot of people have this problem that they go to sleep and then they wake up at three in the morning
or two in the morning, they can't fall back asleep.
And so I said the two major modulators are sleep and non-sleep-deep-rest.
And non-sleep-deep-rest or NSDR is a phrase that, to be direct.
I coined to encompass a lot of behaviors that are designed to just teach you to lower your level of activation
in your nervous system.
Meditation is one form, but the problem with meditation is meditation involves focus.
You have to pay attention to your breath, for instance, sit there and meditate.
That actually puts a high demand on the metabolic systems of the front
and metabolic systems of the forebrain.
So it's work.
It's like reading.
Except you're reading your breaths and your thoughts.
Non-sleep-deep-rest includes things like, as a kind of corny name for some, it's called Yoganejra, which means Yoganejra, which means Yoganejra, sleep you lie down.
You just listen to a script.
You can find these on YouTube or elsewhere.
10-minute ones or 30-minute ones.
Take you through a body scan, some long exhale breathing.
Talk about why this comes to body.
Or there are various forms of hypnosis that really involve teaching you to relax.
So non-sleep-deep-rest is kind of a general term for things that we deliberately do to teach our body to downregulate in real time.
And so I highly recommend that if people have trouble falling back asleep in the middle of the night,
that they turn on a Yoganejra and listen to that, or they use an app like Revery, which I think they have a free trial on there.
Is there a Yoganejra English speaking or is it a chant or what's the Yoganejra going on?
It means Yoganejra sleep.
It's existed for thousands of years.
How's you lie down?
The scripts are in English.
The ones that you'll find on YouTube.
There's actually an NSDR script.
Put out by a team guy in his company made for.
These are again zero-cost tools.
You can just listen to them.
It takes you through a body scan, a lot of long exhale breathing.
The reason he put that out there and the reason why I talk about NSDR is that when people hear Yoganejra or the hear meditation,
they think, you know, flying carpets, monks and lotus position.
And one of the problems with science and with some of the better practices from different communities in Asian and Indian communities is that a lot of it's vaulted behind language.
You know, science is guilty of this too.
You start talking about adrenaline and locusts serrulious.
And if you don't put it in context, you're like, ah, yeah, that doesn't mean anything to me.
Yoganejra sounds like something very foreign.
At the end of the day, non-sleep deep rest practices are all about the same thing.
We have a system in our body called the autonomic nervous system.
This is the system that when bomb blasts goes off or you hear loud noise, immediately put adrenaline in your body.
The most amazing molecule, right?
I mean, if you think about it, you didn't need sleep, you didn't need a nap, you didn't need caffeine.
All of a sudden you are alert, you're done, you're there, rather.
And that's the so-called sympathetic nervous system getting activated.
Broad system goes out, it's called Sympa Casympa means together.
And you have a chain of neurons called the sympathetic chain gangly that run from your belly button up to about your heart.
When some external stimulus or some thought triggers the sympathetic nervous system, all those cells fire up at once.
They just pulse of adrenaline into your body or they trigger the pathways to those.
So when you're driving and you almost get an accident and you feel the adrenaline reaching out to your fingers, that's your feel of confidence.
That's what that's happening.
It's really emanates from the center and what's interesting is in fish and in other animals, all mammals of all kinds, but also in fish.
It actually triggers the muscles of the thoracic muscles and the motor neurons there to start
undulating to know which direction to go.
Animals that get into a threat mode often have an undulation to them.
That's the sympathetic nervous system, you know, a body and motion is more available for movement in any trajectory, as opposed to being completely still.
Etc. So then you have another system, which is the parasympathetic nervous system.
It's like the other end of the seesaw and it's neurons that exist from the neck down to about the heart and from the belly button down to the bottom of your tailbone.
Those are the ones that's so called rest and digest system, but it's much more than that.
It's also the system that allows you to dial out your gaze reflexively.
You can learn how to do that under states of high adrenaline if you like, but naturally when you're relaxed, your gaze dilates.
Reproduction is kind of a balance between the two.
The process of reproducing the verb, literally of sex, not the biological sex, but the verb sex is a process of the autonomic seesaw.
There's a rousal, which involves a kind of balance in these systems, etc.
Kids look it up, not too young, appropriately aged kids look it up, but it's inherent to the evolution of our species is a balance between activation and calm.
And so when we are born, we have an asymmetry in this autonomic nervous system.
That asymmetry is the following.
None of us need to learn how to stress or react.
That system, the activation of the sympathetic nervous system is automatic and response to different thoughts and stimuli cold, for instance, being the universal trigger of adrenaline.
Why not use heat?
Well, you can only use so much heat before you damage tissues or kill people.
You can use a lot of cold as they know on coronado.
You can use cold a lot before you have to be careful, but you have to get pretty damn cold for a long time before you die.
But do be careful with this stuff, obviously.
Now, the parasympathetic system is different.
We rarely learn how to calm ourselves.
We all are familiar with getting sleepy and falling asleep.
That's the parasympathetic nervous system taking over.
The longer we are awake, the longer the buildup of something called a denacene in the brain and body,
and a denacene turns on the parasympathetic nervous system, suppresses the sympathetic nervous system.
When we sleep, a denacene is pushed back down.
What is caffeine?
Caffeine effectively through some chemical steps blocks the effects of a denacene.
So if you wait, so here's a little trick if you, that's, I don't like the word hacks because hacks imply using something for a purpose it wasn't designed for.
Here we're talking about hard-wired biology.
But if you wake up in the morning and you didn't sleep quite as much as you would have liked, that means, and you're sleepy,
that means you still have a buildup of a denacene in your system.
Let's say you immediately reach for caffeine.
Great.
You suppress the action of that adenosine and you will be more alert.
And guess what happens?
Then the caffeine wears off and the adenosine binds to the receptors with greater affinity and you have your afternoon crash.
So a practice that's very useful to people is to delay the intake of caffeine by 60 to 90 minutes after waking.
Allow the adenosine to be cleared out because it's not just cleared out in sleep.
It's also cleared out in those kind of sleepy states of early morning.
So allow it to be cleared out.
The other thing that clears it out, exercise.
So when you get up in the morning you're kind of sleepy.
I don't want to do this.
I don't want to do this, but you hydrate and train.
You clear out the adenosine.
Now I like to drink caffeine before I train or during training.
I'm weak like that.
But for people to have an afternoon crash,
this can have tremendous benefits of.
And maybe start by pushing it out 15 minutes per day.
Most of everyone that does this says, oh my goodness,
I didn't understand why in the afternoon I'm crashing so hard.
This will really, really help.
I've been curious to you drink coffee before you train.
No, so that's for weak people.
I don't like the taste of coffee,
but I also don't drink any caffeine.
I drink one of my go drinks or anything like that.
And I drink water in the morning and I go workout.
And I've thought about it.
I thought, and this, I thought about it.
I always thought well.
Honestly, I thought it seemed kind of weak to like after you do that.
I didn't do that, right?
So I didn't do it.
But there has been time from thinking man.
Like I'll see, you know, look at other people and they'll be like drinking coffee.
Is it working out first thing in the morning?
And I'm thinking, you know, maybe I should do it.
You know, maybe I am wrong.
I know.
I'm hoping to being totally wrong.
Well, here's the thing.
If adrenaline is the most incredible molecule in biology,
and I do believe it is for its capacity to immediately grab our
attentional systems and our readiness systems.
Dopamine is perhaps the second place winner there, but still a significant one.
You know, there's this incredible experiment that's been done in animals and humans that really illustrates what dopamine does.
Take two rats.
They've done this with people in naturally occurring situations.
And you put rats next to some delicious water.
Like they like water with sucrose in it or a delicious food.
And the rats will reach up and drink that or eat that.
Food.
One of the rats it turns out doesn't even have neurons that make dopamine or all their dopamine is blocked by the injection of a drug.
Turns out they will indulge in that food just fine.
Just like the one that has plenty of dopamine.
So just to make sure I'm tracking two rats.
Yeah, every kid has their dopamine has been blocked.
Correct.
But at this point, they're both just eating the sugary drinking the sugary water.
Just everything's fine.
Yep.
Tase good and the experience pleasure.
Both of them experience pleasure.
Proof that dopamine is not required to experience pleasure.
Now you do a simple experiment.
You simply move the location of the food or water.
One rat length away from the rat.
And guess what?
The rat with its dopamine walks over and eats the food.
It might even cross a little metal plate where it gets an electrical shock.
But you know, it's hungry and it wants to eat so it'll take the zap and do it.
The rat without dopamine won't even be able to eat it.
But what does it mean?
Won't even walk one rat slain to get its dopamine even if the food is laid out on the floor for it.
Dopamine is not the molecule of pleasure.
It is the molecule of motivation, desire and pursuit.
See, this is interesting.
We had an experiment that we talked about on here.
I had a back in the day.
I had an RV.
And for whatever reason, I had taken the mint chocolate chip ice cream and put it in the RV freezer
for some reason.
I forget why.
And you know, when that, when that stuff's in the freezer in the house, it was like,
Oh, cool.
I'm going to get it right there.
We're going to go get it, right?
But I guess I wasn't dopamine fueled enough.
Like three, four, five days went by before I was like,
I really want it.
So I'm going to go get it.
Well, it's, it is the molecule of drive.
The way to think about dopamine is that it is a non-infinite yet renewable resource.
Non-infinite yet renewable.
What do I mean by that?
Well, this relates to the energy drink caffeine question.
Should you be doing all this stuff?
Just as adrenaline, epinephrine is released in response to psychological stressors,
physical stressors, cold water, final exams, you know, broken relationship,
excitement.
These are generic molecules.
Right?
I mean, they're used to create activation states in the body.
Dopamine is the molecule of motivation, pursuit, and desire.
And it can be triggered by a number of different things.
However, it is a non-infinite yet renewable resource.
So if you have two big dopamine release,
let's say from methamphetamine cocaine,
I'm going to go in there if I go in there.
Or let's say, let's be fair, because I, you know,
know people, or from being in a lot of gun fights in a short period of time.
The period immediately after that,
will involve a mirror symmetric decrease in dopamine.
You don't go back down to baseline.
You go below baseline.
So we all should guard our dopamine peaks very carefully.
A little bit goes a long way.
A lot goes even further, but it also takes you down deeper afterwards.
This is the basis of addiction.
And this is the beautiful work of on a Lemke and Rob Alenka,
Stanford and elsewhere, showing that when it goes down,
do we want it back right now?
Ah, so the dip afterwards is actually associated with a molecule called
Dynorphin, which is the opposite of endorphin,
and involves pain in the body.
So for every bit of pleasure that we get from pursuit and getting the thing that we were pursuing,
the crash that comes afterwards feels painful.
And all that we need to do in order to return to a baseline of dopamine,
renew that resource, is to wait and make sure that we don't try and trigger
more dopamine in that time.
So you asked about should I be taking caffeine and addition to training and blasting music?
I always say people differ on this spectrum, but be careful about stacking dopamine.
Training itself is a stimulus for dopamine release.
Cold water is a stimulus for dopamine release.
But if you start doing training, cold water,
listening to your favorite music,
plus you're taking, let's say, some stimulant.
Doesn't obviously, the stimulants we've been talking about are terrible,
but some of the stronger stimulants out there,
used to be a fedron in blackenons and college.
But now people taking lateral, is that real?
Now we leave it right now we leave it.
Yeah, I had a guy work with him, fortunately he died,
but you would see, like he was in my cartoon, you would see.
He would take that, he called it rip-y rip.
Well, it's got an irreducerity.
Actually, you can tell if somebody has a lot of dopamine in adrenaline
and they're just by looking at them, their pupils are big.
So somewhat paradoxically, when pupils are big,
your visual aperture is narrow, that just has to do with the,
with the, so called a combination of the eye, the optics of the eye.
So remember, big pupils means somebody is high on their own dopamine
and adrenaline.
Could be drug induced, could be situational, et cetera.
Small pupils are going to be the relaxed state.
Now of course, it's also going to be modulate
by how bright it is in an environment because of the way these systems work.
But when you can see somebody wide-eyed,
well, dopamine and adrenaline also do something else.
They actually trigger activation of the brainstem cranial nuclei
that cause opening of the eyelids.
They also cause an eyes-up effect when we get sleepy,
what happens are eyes go down.
When we're awake, eyelids are open and eyes are up.
They might not be up like this.
These are relate to three different cranial nerve nuclei
for the future med students you'll learn what these are.
So it all makes perfect sense when, when, because nature is beautiful
and the biology is laid out for us.
But if we start stacking behaviors plus form ecology,
plus mind sets that increase dopamine, great.
But what that means is that if you get a really big dopamine increase,
well, then that afternoon you might not feel the drive to do the work.
You might think, how am I sleeping in the after, why am I kind of less motivated?
Or next day for training without that form ecology?
You're thinking, oh yeah, the workout isn't, I don't get it.
Why does intense attraction of muscle?
I'm on a train.
I'm not going to train that.
Exactly.
You said it to that.
That's how you taught the hype chain.
Well, I'm just thinking about it because a lot of times people ask me,
oh, if I have a hard time, you know, like, I get fired up to do stuff
but then I don't actually do it.
You know, that's a common sort of thing for humans.
And now I can kind of track it a little bit.
Oh, you got yourself super worked up.
And then you let that go or you, you know,
maybe you worked for a little bit of time, you know, like,
hey, writing a book, writing a bunch of books.
You're not like hyped to write the book.
You're like, oh man, it's going to be,
and you, that only lasts for seven minutes of typing, bro.
That's it.
It's chopwood.
Yeah.
And then it's like, oh, this is just going to suck.
And that's just the way it is.
But now I realize if you, this is what I like about this.
If you're aware of the fact that, oh, this is my dopamine crash
and I can't, I shouldn't anticipate continue hype
through this situation.
I need to push through it.
That's, that's good awareness to have.
Definitely.
And, you know, nowadays you hear, especially in cell comb,
but dopamine fasting, you know, the people,
I don't even want to look at somebody else's face.
I'm not going to eat any, you know, tasty food.
I'm not going to do anything that stimulates dopamine.
Sure.
That will reset what you find pleasurable.
But let's be realistic.
The better way to do things would be to modulate dopamine release.
Control it.
But make it work for you.
And everyone's going to differ.
So for some people, it's got to be music.
The pre-workout.
The, you know, four cups of espresso.
And, you know, and someone's screaming in their face.
That they have to do it.
Well, for other people, we're required, we're required
a few of those variables.
But everyone needs to learn how they feel both before
during and after a behavior.
You know, I think the right amount of exercises
what you can do consistently in train hard,
but that also allow you to perform, unless you're an athlete.
And that's your profession to be able to do the other things
throughout the day that are beneficial to you.
And of course, some people are training late in the day.
And I have no problem with that.
I got kind of attacked by the fitness and these
does recently or whatever you call them online.
Because I said, you know, training early in the day,
such as the dopamine pulse.
Like, training late in the day has been shown in these
19 studies.
Sure.
I've been sure for when your body temperature is elevated
later in the day, you know, lubrication of the joints
and you know, mental acuity.
Sure.
But for most people who just need to get more movement
and are trying to maximize focus on productivity
throughout the day, early day training is going to be
probably the better option.
But sometimes it's better than no time.
But if you're training late in the day,
and you're getting a big increase in body temperature,
and you're doing it under bright lights,
and you're drinking a pre-workout,
and you're wondering why you can't sleep at night,
you know, you don't have to be sigmin' Freud
or a neuroscientist to understand that you're basically just
have your body cranking your body temperature up.
Hence a lot of these technologies,
and here this isn't a promotion.
At least not now, don't have a relationship to any of them.
I won't even name them.
There are a lot of technologies now about
making your bed cool.
This matter, that this, you know,
to cool down your body temperature at night,
so you can sleep.
So if you start thinking about this thing,
I have a ration and structure, it makes sense.
It also makes sense why, for instance,
after a big win,
sometimes we feel a crash.
And we need some time to reset,
and that lower depression,
sometimes people make the mistake of going out
and pursuing more dopamine.
One of the areas that I have real concern about
just because I hear about it so often,
and it wasn't an issue when I was growing up,
is a lot of young guys in particular approach
to me because they're based on the questions I'm getting.
They're watching a lot of really intense pornography.
And that has, we know,
their studies now going on at Stanford and elsewhere.
You know, pornography,
creates a strong dopamine rush.
These are very primitive pathways
that in some ways can overwhelm the dopamine system.
And then, you know,
another thing is happening,
a lot of young guys are getting all this arousal
from watching other people have sex.
And then they're in the real world scenario,
and it's like, wait,
you're no longer third personning,
you're actually in this scene.
And it's completely collapsing them.
And so I'm not one of these anti-porn people.
I'm not here to judge,
I'm just assigned to some reporting.
I always say,
I'm not doctor,
I don't prescribe things,
I'm a professor,
so I profess things.
You can decide what you want to do with it or not.
But if you once you understand dopamine,
that all makes perfect sense.
They're getting this enormous dopamine release
from something that is external to them.
And real life,
you know,
may not mimic the intensity of the combination of variables, right?
Or people are exercising for a little while
and it's all exciting to them and they're,
you know, taking tons and tons of pharmacology to do it.
And then they're kind of lose motivation.
Well,
it remembered,
non-infinite yet renewable resource.
Yeah,
that's being aware of these things.
I think is so important
because, you know,
if I said,
hey,
you're going to walk through my house
and I'm going to scare you.
I'm going to jump out and scare you at some point.
I probably wouldn't be able to do it.
Because you'd be aware of waiting
and I'd jump out and go boo,
and you'd be like,
oh yeah,
whenever I be able to do it.
But imagine if I didn't tell you.
Right.
And I said,
yeah,
I come by my house and,
you know,
just let yourself in,
I'll be there in a little while,
then I freaking jump out and scare you.
You'd be scared.
Because you're not aware of it.
You're not aware of what's going to happen.
So having awareness,
I remember how to fight her,
who had been highly competitive wrestler,
and he was going to fight in a big organization.
And he was sort of like,
I was like,
hey, are you feeling nervous at all?
This was a couple weeks prior.
Hey, you feel nervous?
He's kind of blown me off a little bit.
You know,
hey,
I've been fighting for,
I've been wrestling for my whole life.
I've been competing.
I've been on the national stage,
blah, blah, blah, blah,
right?
I'm not nervous.
I said,
okay, great.
I should have known better.
Because when he went and fought,
now he's in the UFC,
and he got nervous.
And what really I think messed him up
was he didn't understand what was happening.
And then I remembered I used to talk to like a new guy
that was showing up on deployment.
And you'd see him before and up.
And you could just see the look on their face,
like they are scared.
And what they're scared of is they're scared of getting,
getting killed and getting blown up.
That's fine.
They're scared of doing a bad job.
But what really is making them nervous is the fact
that they feel nervous.
They don't know what that feels like,
because they made it through training.
And they've jumped out of airplanes.
And they've, you know,
scuba dive that night off the coast.
And so they're,
they're used to being afraid.
And they don't feel fear anymore.
So they don't even understand what it feels like.
So they're almost something getting knots
in their stomach.
Their heart rates going.
And they,
that's what they're scared of.
They're like, why am I feeling like this?
And it's freaking out.
So when you say,
ah,
hey, you,
you feel like you got some butterflies in your stomach right now.
You know,
feel like your heart's going a little bit.
And they're like,
and they're like,
you don't want to tell you the truth.
They're like, no, no, I feel fine.
It's like bullshit.
I can see.
And they go, yeah.
And say, cool,
you're just nervous.
It's just your body getting ready for combat.
It's no big deal.
Everyone's going to feel like that.
And then they feel okay.
So situations that you're talking about where,
if you don't know what it is,
it's like that enough can can,
can make you fall.
Whereas you say,
hey, listen,
after you get a big dopamine hit,
you're not going to feel fired up three hours later.
That's when you got to put in the work.
Be aware of the fact that you won't feel like doing it.
Because people think,
we know what the other student feel like going anymore.
It's like, yeah,
of course you didn't.
You got all your dopamine and you already used it.
And you need to let that thing rebuild.
But you can still go get a good workout.
And you can go still complete the task.
You can go still write some more,
you know,
for your book that you're doing or do whatever labor you got to do.
So I think it's very important for people to understand what's going on inside.
So they don't feel like it's,
do you maybe what we want to do this?
You know,
maybe I don't even want to be here.
I'm not,
you know,
I just get to get to,
because I change it just to it night.
Or in the afternoon.
And man,
when I was in the team,
sometimes you come home and you're like,
do I really want to do this right now?
And I would just say,
yeah,
you do.
Yeah,
it doesn't matter how you feel.
You're just going to go do it.
So being able to overcome that,
I think that's what's nice about what you're informing us of
is people can now go,
oh,
I know what this is.
This isn't me being a whimp.
This isn't me,
you know,
not wanting to do this.
It's my own natural,
you know,
hormones that are doing this thing.
Make me feel as way,
and I can just work through them.
Absolutely.
Extremely well put.
You know,
earlier I mentioned
in the reference to sunlight,
I talked about dopamine and testosterone.
testosterone has a huge number of effects in the body.
And it's sibling molecule,
if you will,
dihydrates testosterone is perhaps the more dominant
and hydrogen in human.
dihydrotest.
D-h-t.
Okay.
You know,
there are pharmacologic versions of this,
right?
Oxantialone,
and of war.
I'm not suggesting people take those, right?
What I'm talking about is the DHT,
you make naturally very powerful androgen.
It's converted from testosterone into,
you get DHT in a conversion of testosterone to DHT
through a molecule called five alpha reductase.
Anytime you hear ACE,
it's almost always an enzyme.
ACE is basically,
you know,
cat,
the improtonase,
you know,
okay.
So DHT,
it's going to cause some,
male pattern balnes, so this,
your widow's peak,
yep,
what was it widow's peak?
Uh,
so you can't tell.
My,
now elaborating widow's peak.
That's dihydrates testosterone.
Cause it beer growth on the face and causes,
male pattern balnes,
has inverse effect on the scalp and on the face.
Like as other effects,
strength, et cetera.
The testosterone molecule in the dopamine molecule
bear a very close relationship.
So if somebody pushes pushes,
pushes really hard,
winds, winds,
yes, that will increase testosterone.
Winning increases testosterone,
losing decreases testosterone in all venues.
So,
they look at this with,
with day traders,
win, win, win, win, win, win,
more money, they get more tests out.
They're losing,
okay, now here's the interesting thing.
I had an episode of the podcast with the great Robert
Sapolsky,
why Zeebris don't get ulcers,
the trouble with testosterone, et cetera.
Let's talk about the effects of testosterone and DHT
in the brain.
The main effect of these endrogens in the brain
is to make effort feel good.
Because of the way that testosterone and DHT
bind to receptors and activate certain components
of the amygdala.
We always think of the amygdala as a fear-centered,
but it's a threat detection center,
and it has a lot of different parts,
including parts that allow you to be
forward-centre of mass in response to pressure.
So,
my suggesting people take exogenous testosterone,
no, that's a personal choice that people can explore
on their own if they want to do that.
But if you've been pushing, pushing, pushing,
and winning, or just pushing really hard,
and then you've experienced that crash,
a lot of people need some time to recover
in order to be able to come back and be able to work hard again.
But here's what's really interesting.
Not only does testosterone make effort feel good,
effort increases testosterone.
So, this is the athlete or the student
who they don't want to do it,
I don't want to do anything.
Getting into some degree of forward-centre of mass.
I always say, I think I picked this up from a team
guys right in Team Guy language.
You can either be back on your heels,
or you can just go back to your flat foot,
or forward-centre of mass on anything.
Getting into that forward-centre of mass,
mental orientation,
can start to trigger some of the pathways related
to these hormones and these neuromodulators.
What you don't want to do is start using a lot of exogenous factors.
Caffeine,
or a lot of things outside of you in order
to try and create those states,
because then you're going to further deplete
your dopamine and so on.
When I think you went on a rogan at one point
and I overheard a portion of the conversation
where you said,
working really hard, and then you went on vacation,
and then you got sick.
So this is interesting.
That's the autonomic nervous.
That's happening to me like numerous times.
Okay, so there's a very clear explanation
for that in a very simple remedy,
although it's not obvious,
which is why many people experience this.
Many people experience studying for finals,
and then it ends getting sick.
Taking care of a loved one,
round the clock.
The person either gets better,
or sometimes dies, or whatever it is.
And then the caretaker gets sick.
Why is that?
Well, we always hear that stress compromises
the immune system.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Stress activates the immune system.
Think about how would your immune system
you're spleen and your other immune organs
of the body know when it's under pressure?
Well, you could have some foreign bacteria
virus in your body,
but when you are in a mode of go-go,
the molecule adrenaline triggers
the release of killer B cells and T cells from the spleen.
It's when you relax.
Now, you need to get your sleep,
but it's when you finally experience that
symmetric swing back of the C-Sauce.
Go, go, go, go, go, boom.
And then you completely relax,
and you're hanging out with it,
and also you get the sniffle and the rest of the thing.
This is, there's a beautiful study done by
that was done in response to none other than
whim-haw, believe it or not.
There's a really beautiful quality scientific study.
Published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
where they had two groups of people,
one group meditated, the other group did whim-haw-ftype breathing.
So what we call in the laboratory cyclic hyperventilation.
So inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, 25 times.
FOURSFUL INHALS and FOURSFUL EXHALS.
Then hold your breath,
long, 70 for 15 seconds repeat for about three rounds.
What does that do? Why do you heat up adrenaline?
It's a generic thing.
It's adrenaline. You could've gotten into an ice bath, adrenaline.
You could have someone shout in your face,
adrenaline.
It's just adrenaline. What do they do?
They injected both groups of people with E. coli.
Inject in them with E. coli.
One group gets nauseous, vomiting and feel sick.
The group that does this cyclic hyperventilation whim-haw
also called two-motip breathing,
far fewer symptoms if any, including lack of fever.
So why? Well, they were able to combat the attack of this bacteria.
So if you're coming off of a hard-bought of work
and you're starting to relax into vacation,
you would be wise to still get into some cold water.
You would be wise to still do some cyclic hyperventilation breathing.
Certainly don't do those at the same time.
A number of people actually have died doing cyclic hyperventilation
and then doing breath holds.
Because when you exhale a lot of carbon dioxide,
carbon dioxide is the trigger to breathe.
This is really important.
If you do hyperventilation,
and then you hold your breath,
you can do a much longer breath hold than you could
if you just started off without having done that.
Why?
You don't take breaths because of a need for oxygen,
although you do need that.
You take breaths because of a build-up of carbon dioxide.
Triggers these brainstem neurons, which have you do the gas-free flex.
Okay.
Well, if you dump all your carbon dioxide
and you're not a skilled free diver,
like Markili or somebody like that,
who really understands that what happens is you're swimming along.
Like, wow, I can really hold my breath down here
a long time, lights out.
And I shall am aware of a few people in the military community
who have dabbled with whim-haw,
two-month-type breathing and a diet, and it's not good.
I think it's not allowed, basically.
It's certainly not encouraged from what I understand.
So do it on land away from water.
And the idea here is that adrenaline protects us.
You don't want it cascading out of control
so that you can't sleep.
You want to use things like non-sleep,
depressed in the appropriate timing of light and exercise,
etc. to be able to sleep well at night
to reset all these systems.
But if you go too quickly from go-go-go-go to complete relaxation,
your immune system, your defense system will crash too.
And so you're not going to be able to fight off even the smallest
or the pettiest of viruses in bacteria.
That's when you get the sniff will get sick.
And like I'm finally resting, what's going on?
So you can taper out of those high intensity phases.
There are actually guys in the teams,
now that I think are aware of this and are starting to think about this
and for various effects.
But in the mind, testosterone makes effort feel good.
Adrenaline puts us into a mode of readiness.
Don't put me and puts us into a mode of motivation.
And then there's the mirror side of all this,
which are the neurochemicals that broadly defined
promote relaxation and parasimpathetic activation.
And those come under the names that you've probably heard them before,
like serotonin, oxytocin, and the hormone prolactin.
Serotonin and oxytocin are molecules that make us feel good,
make us feel soothed, not in response to things that were motivated
to go get, but in response to what we already have.
So this might sound a little woo, but if you sit there and do a gratitude practice,
or you hang out with your dog and your kids, or you eat a meal,
you're nourishing yourself with food that you are not in the process
and having to kill first.
You're just really in thanksgiving,
a few moments of appreciation, simple things.
The feel good that you experience the love and kindness
meditations, these kinds of things.
We know based on neuroimaging studies and blood draws and things of that sort,
and there's always some things like serotonin and oxytocin.
The nature has designed beautiful systems of pursuit and pleasure
that are designed to oscillate and designed to keep us in pursuit
in pleasure cycles.
In relationships, typically the dopamine phases that you're
early phase simultaneously in these cycles.
Oftentimes, not simultaneously, typically dopamine and serotonin
are released.
There's always some floating around our system at any moment,
but typically dopamine and adrenaline are associated
with pursuit of things that are outside the confines of our immediate possession
in our skin, and serotonin is more about the things that we have,
the things seeing your kid, holding your kid,
that promotes the release of oxytocin and serotonin.
It feels amazing.
These are the molecules that lead to our evolution as a species.
I'm not diminishing one or the other, but they need to oscillate.
Early relationship, there are times when people aren't sleeping very much.
It's like a mental illness.
It's a form of mania.
They're so excited.
You don't need to sleep.
People are able to do all sorts of things that frequency and intensity
that they find themselves two years later in a relationship,
and they love the person.
It's very warm and cozy, but well, unless they're going off on deployments
and coming back, they don't have that reset of the system.
So, the ability to miss somebody, reset that pursuit and desire system.
These are powerful systems, and they don't just pertain to romantic relationships.
This is also school.
I always did summer school because I had to do a lot of catching up to do, based on the
lot of catching up.
But there's some value in taking a week off, and realizing you are truly resetting all
the systems for pursuit.
I hear from a lot of hard driving folks who, like, wow, once I understood dopamine,
I realize why I'm so burnt out.
People think of adrenal burnout.
I guess what?
There's no actual medical term adrenal burnout.
There's adrenal insufficiency syndrome.
That's a rare syndrome, but you have enough adrenaline packed away in your brain
about three lifetimes.
Think about what people used to go through.
I mean, you talk about some of this on your podcast.
You see the images of people and you read the stories.
You can make it through finals.
Kids.
So, what happens though is we're in such modes of pursuit and overthinking over thinking,
we need to learn how to switch back and forth on a regular basis.
What I call deliberate decompression, or non-sleep deep rest,
have a practice each day of 10 to 30 minutes where you're not on your phone,
and you're in kind of a wordless state.
You're just either yoga, knee-dra, you're just relaxing,
or not watching anything, not taking in any sensory information,
not meditating, not journaling, just in a state of just trying to blank your mind.
And just watch how much stronger you come back in terms of your ability to focus in your motivation.
That's one I love the phone, and social media has been very good to me,
and I appreciate many of its features.
But one of the problems is we tend to fill our idle time with more sensory information,
and that doesn't allow us to go into this deliberate decompression.
It doesn't allow us to, you remember, I cut myself off,
but a picture is worth a thousand words,
while a movie is worth a million pictures.
Now I can scroll through millions of movies very quickly,
and so the dopamine system is just a little bit overwhelmed.
I don't think we need to be off our phones all the time.
We just take some time to just deliberately decompress each day, any time of day.
And you'll focus better.
So you're getting hit with that dopamine on Instagram.
So at first you are, but here's how you know dopamine,
and it's just we'll give you a window into addiction.
If you're not an addict, you'll be able to sympathize with maybe an empathize with addicts,
of various kinds.
When you first get on social media, you're excited.
Maybe you or Joe or somebody has a new podcast out, right?
You know, you're excited.
I can't wait to hear that's dopamine.
You're motivated.
But if you ever find yourself doing it behavior, and you kind of don't know why you're doing it,
like this doesn't feel any good anymore.
It's like that. What is that Chris?
Well now he's a funny story there because new stuff,
but that Chris Rock thing where he's talking about like,
you know when you're shanking somebody and your heart's just not in it.
Like, does this funny thing, right?
I think it was him.
You're sort of like, yeah, your heart's not in it.
Like, why am I here? Why am I, what am I doing?
I'm not even getting any pleasure, but here I am,
like a, you know, rap pressing a lever.
Well, that's the dopamine system has been
depleted.
And so what you need is some time away from it,
could be 10 minutes, could be 10 days.
And then it feels good again.
True for relationships, true for exercise.
You know, I believe in training hard and training often,
but if you train too hard, too often,
you can't bring the intensity that you need to get the stimulus to adapt and pretty soon you're either plateauing or getting worse.
Here's the experiment I did with myself.
And I went in my ice bath and I had my, I was,
for whatever reason I would like wanted to see something on social media on Instagram.
So I was like, I'm just going to look at, I want to waste some time,
so I'm just going to wall and sit in the ice bath for, you know, five minutes.
I'm going to look at it, look at social media.
So I got, I'm, I'm on Instagram in my ice bath.
And normally you're in your ice bath and you're like,
how long I've been in here for?
You don't really want to look at your watch, you know?
It's like if I'm going to torture someone when they're in my ice bath,
I'm like, you've been in for 30 seconds.
That's 37 seconds.
That's someone to tell them every increment of time,
because you're not going to let it all blow together.
So you know, I always hold off on looking at my watch,
you know, when I'm in there, I'm just going to wait,
you know, because it's not going to be as long as you thought it was.
So I'm in that mode, I'm looking at Instagram.
So my hands aren't in it, but still.
It's like, I'm, I'm looking at Instagram.
And I go, how long has it been?
It's probably been, it's probably been,
it's probably been at least, I'm probably at the three minute mark right now.
I roll over, look at my watch, I'm at like five, 20.
So I got that way.
That's how people look at their freaking screen.
And all of a sudden, they look up and they've wasted 28 minutes on there.
Because I mean, I was in it, in cold water, you know?
And time went by a little bit quicker.
Imagine if you're sitting in a relaxing chair or whatever,
you know, that's just going to slip by you and next thing,
you know, you've been looking at your phone for 22 minutes or a half an hour.
You know, you can write 500 words for a book and a half an hour.
You know, like you can do, you can do a lot of things in half an hour
that are going to benefit you as a human being.
Instagram isn't one of them.
Right.
The algorithm is going to get you.
That's right.
It's going to get you.
And if you want to create content, you build the raw materials.
You find and build on the raw materials for that content away from the place where you distribute that content.
I always tell myself that I love reading scientific papers and books,
but Instagram can draw me in too.
And I always say the gems exist outside of social media.
And I want to bring those to the podcast and to social media.
So the deep writing read into the library or to these papers, the more I can bring.
I'm glad you brought up time perception because dopamine and serotonin
and the states they are associated with.
So broadly speaking, dopamine and adrenaline,
were serotonin and oxytocin or associated with different perceptions of time.
Here's the best way to think about this is if you've ever had a day that was really exciting.
Or I think to an op that was particularly exciting or difficult or challenging required a lot of focus.
It's amazing how quickly you perceive that day going by.
But then when you look back on it, it feels like so much happened.
Now think about waiting in the doctor's office.
It feels like it goes on forever. And yet you look back on it and it feels like nothing happened.
Dopamine and adrenaline change our perception of time.
We've micro-sliced time, but it seems like everything goes by really fast.
And then when we look back, like we did this and then we did that.
And we did that. I think when you're a 10 year old and it's your birthday.
And so much happened, so much dopamine.
Then think about the most boring phase of doing nothing.
You look back nothing happened. Why? It's all about how these neuromodulators shift our perception of time.
Our gaze and our understanding of the outside world and so on.
So you can imagine that if you're on Instagram and you're scrolling and scrolling and not a whole lot is happening.
And yet you go, oh my god, time. All this time went by but nothing happened.
Well, you're not in a high dopamine state.
When you're in a high dopamine state, you will know because life feels exciting.
You'll almost feel a readiness in your nervous system because some people even tremble a little bit.
That's the readiness for action because again, these are generic molecules.
They didn't evolve for social media or for gunfights or for rolling jiu-jitsu or for taking final exams or studying for them.
They evolved either put us into states of readiness and pursuit or relaxation.
And so once you understand that we all have both systems in us, but that some people,
the seesaw is just naturally tilted a little bit toward one side or the other.
Excuse me. Then you're in a position of really control it as opposed to controlling you.
And there's a term that I like to use when thinking about this.
We all think about stress but really there are two kinds of stress.
There's the, I'm too activated. I'm too alert and I need to calm down.
And then there's the, I'm too calm and I need to lean into action.
And I refer to this as limbic friction.
Your limbic system controls these very basic states of being alert or being stressed or being calm.
But your forebrain, this incredible real estate just behind your forehead,
is what controls what we call top down modulation.
It's the look at the watch. It's 445.
Jocco is already up. I need to do this. But wait, hold on.
If I get into action adrenaline will come thoughts actually allow us to overcome our limbic tendency
to just want to go back to sleep.
Or if I'm very, very stressed, I can quickly calm down.
I can just pass along. There's actually a physiological tool to calm down.
It wasn't discovered by me. It was discovered in the 1930s.
There's a pattern of breathing that every person and every mammal does when carbon dioxide builds
up too much in the bloodstream. And it's called a physiological side.
This is two inhales through your nose.
And then a long full exhale. Looks crazy.
But believe it or not, we all do this once every five minutes or so.
This podcast is like the documentation of the release of that.
Because I'll be reading something just super stressful or even talking to someone
that was an octaribal situation.
You can go to those in this podcast and you'll hear like,
just silence and you'll hear me go.
Like it's so obvious that I do that to release the stress that I have from,
you know, listening to someone or dragging some horrible story out of someone.
Exhales slow the heart down, inhale, speed the heart up.
There's something called respiratory cytosatrythme.
So for when you inhale, basically what happens is your diaphragm moves down, right?
You actually moves down. There's actually more space in your,
the cavity that your heart sits in, blood flows more slowly through that larger volume.
Heart got a little bigger. The brain sends a signal, speed the heart up.
When you exhale, that diaphragm moves up, heart gets a little smaller,
blood moves more quickly through that smaller space.
Brain sends a signal to slow the heart down.
If you increase the duration or the intensity of exhales relative to inhales,
you'll calm down. Increase the intensity or the duration of inhales relative to exhales.
You will become more alert through these brainstem centers that we're not discovered by me.
But by this brilliant guy at UCLA named Jack Feldman who found the two brain areas that
responsible for this physiological size, reopen all the small sacks in the lungs so that you
can then offload the maximum amount of carbon dioxide when you exhale.
So the big deep inhale through the nose and then squeeze in a little bit more air,
re-inflates the little sacks in the lungs and allows you to offload carbon dioxide on the long
exhale that follows. You do this in sleep.
People who have apnea don't do this well.
Appnea is very dangerous. It actually will shorten your life, lead to all sorts of issues.
Not good. People who use the CPAP or they'll learn to mouth-breed,
they're due to these kinds of things. You can also use physiological size between rounds and
gejitsu to calm down if you want to calm down or you can do more inhales if you want to ramp up.
I mean, fighters know this stuff intuitively and they know how to use breath.
But none of these are hacks. These are defined circuits that we all come into the world with.
And the reason I say they're not hacks is they work the first time and they work every time because
guess what you're using them all the time anyway. We're just not normally aware.
And so you can when you're speaking a lot oftentimes you'll feel stressed because you're not taking a few
moments to do these double inhales and exhale. So I'm doing now.
But if you have in trouble sleeping, do some long exhale breathing. You'll notice you'll calm down.
So I call these real time tools because they don't involve stepping away from what you're doing.
The other cool thing about the physiological size that the nerve that controls the diaphragm is called the
frenic nerve and it has a little branch we call this a collateral that goes to the liver and a few other organs.
If you're ever running and you get that side stitch, it's you think it's a cramp.
That is not a cramp. That has to do with your pattern of breathing and the movement of the diaphragm.
And the frenic nerve sometimes gets into a pattern of firing that's not quite often when you're getting what's called
referred pain of the liver and the pain inside the body is not as precise as it is on the surface of the body.
What do you do? Well, we used to be told, though, you run with your hands over your head or you need more water.
All you have to do is a few physiological size and you'll reset the pattern of breathing to the correct motion.
So the next time you have a side stitch or a cramp, just do a few double inhale exhales while running and that
referred pain will just disappear.
So you mentioned the limbic system. So I'm sitting here, you're painting this picture when you're talking about serotonin
and your testosterone and dopamine. You get this picture head like, wow, every human being should just be running
at this optimum thing where, hey, I'm going to go get some testosterone award reward from my dopamine
and then when I'm done with that, I'm going to go hug my kids and it seems like we should be in this perfect cycle
of where everything is great because we either in pursuit or we're on gratitude and this is great.
Unfortunately, we all know that that's not the reality and people end up in this weird thing where they don't go in
in pursuit. And matter of fact, they don't go in pursuit at all. They don't even get off the couch.
We have people that don't appreciate what they've got. And so, so is that the limbic?
What is the opposing force to these two totally positive things that we've got out there of, hey, I've got this dopamine
reward system when I go out. I'm going to do some squats. I'm going to feel great when I get done.
I'm going to see my dog. I'm going to pet him. I'm going to feel great. Like life is great.
What is the opposing force on these things that trips us up?
Very important question. And fortunately or unfortunately, we have an answer, which is that we can now access
dopamine release without any effort at all.
High, flavor, high calorie density food.
Right? It's probably rare in nature at one point. We had to work hard in order to get
game, get grains, get berries. So it was used to be effort, dopamine, relaxation, repeat.
Now, you can get enough dopamine from food. Remember the rat just sitting there?
It doesn't, it won't cross the cage, because as no dopamine, but most people are like the rat just sitting there just
popping. I saw this on the plane and I'm not being disparaging of anybody, but I sat down next to this person.
And it was, and I was not shocked. I was actually just really dismayed. This person was sitting there kind of like
hooded eyes. I don't think they had been drinking alcohol. Didn't smell like it.
Just popping cheetos into their mouth like a rat just feeding from a dispenser. Just the whole time just passively.
Right? So you gain in this low level of dopamine. Lots of calories, lots of with no activity.
Yes, their phenotype as we'd say in biology was as you would predict. And it was just really sad.
There was no, there was, I think that when it's, it's fair to say that
Dop, high levels of dopamine achieved without effort will destroy a person. Whether or not that comes through a high potency drug or a
high potency food, if it comes within an intensity and a frequency that's too high that doesn't require effort, it will destroy a person.
So what else is there? There's food. We can get a dopamine hit from cheetos. Anything pleasurable.
Yeah, I would say this TV work. Yeah, I would say I'm here on borrowing from onalemkeys work. She's a, again, a medical doctor who focuses on dopamine and addiction, but also behaviors
that relate to addiction video game addiction, for instance. So social media or YouTube addiction. I can give you a one very saline example this.
When we're getting, you know, let's say that dopamine, it doesn't work actually work this way, but let's just say with arbitrary units can be released anywhere from zero to a hundred level.
Let's say, methemphetamine is a hundred because we know it does evoke a lot of dopamine. You release. Let's say a nice pizza after a good long run is 20.
What about a nice pizza after watching a Netflix show? Yeah, is that I'm saying is that is there is that also going to be a 20 or is that only a 10 because you didn't really earn it.
Well, it can be very pleasurable, but what's going to happen is that you're still getting dopamine and it's incremental. Remember I said earlier stacking dopamine is dangerous.
It's not that you have one reservoir or one kind of hydraulic system putting a pressure for dopamine and then you spend it all and it comes back.
You have multiple things. So if you're listening to music and you're eating and you're having a good time, that's great. I mean, that's life. I mean, we want to encourage people not be total stoics and they want to enjoy life.
But what's going to end up happening if you're just sitting there eating high calorie food, taking in a lot of sensory information that has you really wrapped with attention.
There's really no incentive to be motivated to do anything else at a biological level.
So then someone's in fact, I was talking to my podcast producer. He had a friend in college that was a spectacular student early on and got really into video games and there came the data move out of their house.
And everyone was packing up and moving out and this guy didn't have his stuff together and the trucks were literally coming.
It's like, and they realized he actually can't do anything. He's only seems to be getting his dopamine from this one behavior.
I have a close friend who's son graduated from high school was going to community college and pretty soon developed what he thought was a case of pretty severe ADHD and depression.
Obviously that can happen. Young guy, no, no, he's always been a swimmer and an athlete, very impressive kid. Good looking kid, always very sociable.
And pretty soon he wasn't going to his community college classes. He wasn't working, no relationship living at home with the parents. This is what they call fairly or to launch.
I'm going to say, pretty scary at 20, much scarier 25. He heard on a lengthy talk to on a different podcast about the dopamine system. And he realized that he spent all his time on YouTube video games. He got a little bit into crypto and was kind of dabbling there nothing.
And he went on a complete fast of all these things. And I'm pleased to say that he's complete now. He's now lives with his girlfriend. He's got a job. He's completely off any ADHD meds.
And I realize some people do need these ADHD meds. Guess what ADHD meds are. Riddle in, adder all, vivants. They all trigger the release of dopamine.
It's a way of getting dopamine. And some people really need that. But you can imagine if you're getting it from all these sensory stimuli, YouTube, et cetera.
And listen, I love YouTube. I appreciate them. But you, it's a potent stimulus. You can find pretty much anything on there.
And so the key, you asked, why are we so off balance? Why can't we just do this naturally? Because naturally, we just want pleasure. We really do as a species, just seek pleasure and avoid pain.
All species do that. And now it takes a very deliberate, for brain-oriented person who really actually associates their value in their self image with effort and reward, not just reward,
to get through this jungle of, you know, plants that can basically just grab us and pull us down. And we see it everywhere.
And it should not surprise us at all. And so is the key to completely discard with any pleasures? No. The key is put effort in front of pleasure.
And you will have a, and learn how to relax and access these other systems of serotonin, et cetera, and appreciation.
If you can do that, you can completely control the trajectory of your life. But pleasure without effort preceding it is absolutely deadly.
It's, you could be in on this one echo variable rewards. So like even when you're looking at YouTube, right? And you click on a video.
And it looks good. It's got a good thumbnail. Right? It's good to click. Big eyes. They told us you know thumbnails with crazy eyes actually get more clicks.
Okay. So there you go. So you get Lord in on that, but it's not quite as good as you want.
So then, but you see another one. And so you click on that one. And it's not quite as good. But then you click on one. It's all this pretty good.
You know, it had a good freaking car crash in it or whatever it is that you wanted to see.
And so then, if you get that variable reward in Instagram, you get it in YouTube and, and where it's like you get a little spike like, oh there it is.
That that was a really good meme or whatever. That one made me laugh. You know, you have to look at seven memes that are dumb.
And then you see a good one. And then you go, well, maybe the next one would be good too. And you want that little hit.
It's freaking disturbing. How's it doing with anticipation, right? Or something like that? Yes. You guys are are team me up with the exact language.
So the best schedule for maintaining motivation over time is called random intermittent reinforcement.
This is what the slot machines do. This is gambling. The reason people go to Vegas go, I like to do a little bit of gambling.
I like to sit there. I like the dumb gambling. I like roulette. I just like to sit there and watch the wheel go.
I don't like to have a thing too hard or look at the cards or anything. Just put things on numbers and eventually get something and go. You know, sometimes I win sometimes I lose.
But it's always a set amount. Why do I like this? Well, something's boring, boring, and then boom, you hit.
You hit. You get 18 to one on something. That's random intermittent reinforcement is the most powerful reinforcement schedule in all species for all things.
Some people even all species, all things, all species random, all mammalian species intermittent reward.
Yeah, give a rat a reward for pressing a lever every time. It actually will press that lever less often. It'll get its dopamine fix.
Right? It's the person next meeting, Cheetos on the plane. They'll keep doing it, but not with this. They won't work to do it.
Whereas if you give it to them every fifth time animals and people learn intuitively, they're not necessarily even counting. They just know how fast they need to press before they get it again.
Random intermittent reinforcement means if you're not expecting a reward, you get more dopamine.
So you set anticipation. So there's something in the dopamine literature that is called reward prediction error.
If you anticipate a reward and it comes, you get some dopamine. If you don't anticipate a reward and it comes, you get even more dopamine from the same reward.
And if you anticipate a reward and it doesn't come, guess what, dopamine drops below baseline.
Hey kids, we're going to go get ice cream. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. You get to the ice cream shop closed.
Ooh, not good. You crash them below. Now you're negotiating trips to Disneyland.
Right? If you are walking by an ice cream shop, you turn to them and you say, ice cream?
Bigger dopamine release from the actual ice cream. This is a very powerful modulator of our behavior. So anticipation is key because remember, dopamine isn't about the pleasure.
Dopamine is about the anticipation of pleasure. And there are beautiful experiments if people want to learn more about this.
Just put reward prediction error. The guy will from Schultz. Yes, was the guy who over in Germany who discovered a reward prediction error.
He found that the neurons in the brain that control dopamine release are firing before you get the reward.
And then you get the reward and goes up a little bit and then drops. And that drop is the pain that you feel afterwards. Why to keep animals and humans motivated to go pursue more.
And a lot of our behavior can be understood through reward prediction error. This also pertains again human relationships.
Don't tell somebody a restaurant is so incredible or a blank is so incredible. Don't build yourself up to be so incredible.
If you want to actually be experienced as that incredible anticipation is wonderful, but then you better bring it because if you don't, you are going to sink dopamine way lower than you would have otherwise.
So surprise is one of the wonderful elements of the dopamine circuitry. And if you think about an animal foraging for food or a human foraging for food, this is what led to people looking for game to kill.
Well, you're a hunter, right? You're maybe your hunter as well. I've done a hunting, but I've done some fishing and I'm like, oh, this is a vom's.
Pretty nice. I'm good. And it's pretty good. What are you hunt for? And just kidding.
And it's a real stretch to call me hunter. I got in hunting a few years ago and have been going hunting each year. Very cool, very, very rewarding, very difficult, very, very rewarding.
Yeah, it's, you know, because that's a very dynamic system as our gunfights and whatnot. It's not just about hitting targets on a range, obviously the other person or the animal gets a vote too.
And so that's that we we crave that as human beings and combat taps into that and basic mating interactions and the things that lead up to that, you know, the the dance that is human evolution of of mating and aggression and all these other things.
You know, all tap into the dopamine system and we experience winds and then we try and make predictions about where we will experience winds again based on our previous history.
And yet what keeps us, it will be so boring if you always knew the deer was going to be standing right next to that tree looking at you, right?
One reason I like campaigns as videos and I watch those is I love the unpredictability of it. I'm also always amazed at how many objects are in front of them and obviously a very skilled hunter.
So it's the uncertainty that that certainly people in special operations, you know, it's defined by uncertainty. The rules are set and yet there's this huge set of variables for which you need to be able to adapt in real time.
That's going to lead to more dopamine increase than anything else.
Yeah, it's it's interesting because the the hunting thing like how does it compare to combat? I've had guys ask me that and there's a really big difference is that
that you know that thing's not going to shoot back at you, but if you go and hunt like a grizzly bear with a bow and arrow and you mess up that thing absolutely will kill you.
So that does go that does get very close to the the same kind of a scenario that you're dealing with and I'm sure the dopamine hit and I haven't hunted any barrier, but that's got to be a next level.
Absolutely, I remember backpacking in glacier and running into a bear cub pop you know the eaten berries on the trail. We took the bear bell off, you know those bear bells are really annoying.
The whole time walk with these bear bells and let's take these bear bells off ignore the range and you know and we're hiking out and sure enough is a bear cub sitting there and you go, first you go bear cub and then you go bear cub.
So absolutely there's you know these systems again are oriented toward our survival or reproduction are drive when we meet people that are very driven.
Typically it's because they have systems like yourself like yourself. I'm in these systems almost always are designed to overcome whatever for too early or as limbic friction.
It's rarely that someone has just a system of making everything easy that allows them to be continually motivated. I think this is one of the big misconceptions people think oh and we've done episodes on the human and lapar has like workspace optimization and I always sort of hesitate to do these episodes because it's true.
You put your computer screen up as opposed to looking down it you'll be alert for longer because of what we're talking about before eye positioning. If you have a standing desk you probably alert because standing actually you know and so on and so forth. But when you find is that people that display
motivation over long periods of time have systems that put them into limbic friction and then overcome limbic friction again and again remember effort then reward.
And many people are looking for the tools the hacks and the tricks that are going to take all the effort part out.
What you want to do is build the effort and the limbic friction in and then the reward in on a consistent basis brief me again on the limbic friction.
Yeah, so where's that common from yeah so you have areas of the brain the old days people used to call them ancient and then now people don't like that but basically there are parts of the brain that exist in humans and in other animals like the hypothalamus which is a cluster of neurons basically above the roof of your mouth.
And it's a little tiny real estate within the nervous system but controls things like motivation aggression rage sex behavior temperature. These are clusters of new of what we call new clear little clusters of neurons.
And these different primitive states so much so that if I were to just tickle one of those within electrode I could put you into a rage state like that. There's a wonderful video for people want to see it it's a little disturbing for people can't handle this stuff from David Anderson's lab at Caltech you put you can put Anderson lab aggression mating into YouTube to mice.
Electrode in an area of the brain called ventramedio hypothalamus stimulate one category of neurons in there using some neuroscience tricks and the animal immediately goes over and starts to mate with the female animal okay.
And turn those neurons off there ways you can do this instantaneously and remotely turn on the neurons in the ventramedio hypothalamus that are distinct from those and the animal starts to kill the other animal. Put that animal alone in a cage with a glove filled with air stimulate these neurons it tries to kill the glove.
Looks like a kid at an elastic front show it's just swing is armed like that you know just rage although that's a controlled rage so we have switches in the hypothalamus then we have this real estate that we call the prefrontal cortex which is controls rational decision making.
Has access to the hippocampus with information about the past the present and the future right when we're in the states of rage it's all about now states of stress it's all about now states of fear it's all about now the prefrontal cortex can draw on a memory bank of experiences from the past the present and future for better or for worse and say.
The last time we tried to cross this bridge with our team things didn't work out so well let's stop let's think or we're under attack you immediately want to respond.
You guys called swift violent action but sometimes I'm guessing there's a time to like regroup swift violent action in a more successful way.
I'm just borrowing language from your community. That ability to tamp down basic physiological responses is controlled by the forebrain.
Suppressing the limbic pathways so there's a friction between our rational mind and these impulses.
There's a famous case of the guy that was working on the railways every psychology student learns about this spike. Despite through his forebrain it went through orbital frontal cortex that's prefrontal cortex what happened well the story goes that he became sort of inappropriate so if you didn't like you he'd tell you.
I don't like you swear you you went to church before as a real good guy after that he was you know screaming at people and call profanities and things like that.
There's a condition called clover busy syndrome which relates to a different brain area but also the forebrain where animals or people will start to mate with inanimate objects.
Right this is inappropriate behavior according to the limbic system but they don't see as inappropriate because they they're forebrain is shut down. So limbic friction describes the the tension in this neural circuitry between the forebrain and these reflexes.
And remember it has two sides one is the ability to suppress action and the other is the ability to engage action when you would otherwise want to be relaxed.
And because not because some of the areas of the hypothalamus are involved in relaxation. So you want to stay in bed.
I'm be honest you know for me I hope for many people there's a strong pull to stay under the covers and sleep longer tell yourself that you know you heard on a podcast it sleeps important. You know all this stuff. You dive dementia. You don't sleep enough.
And you have to tell yourself no.
No it's the effort followed by the reward that I'll feel later that's the ticket.
And so that's an example of limbic friction that you overcome where the forebrain takes over now you're in action you're in forward center of mass or your ex so that's overcoming exhaustion or so the so the limbic system can screw you in both ways.
It could screw me in like I lose my temper and I attack you and I end up going to jail because I because I stabbed you in the neck because I lost my temper.
I can also screw me by hey you know you don't really don't feel like going to work out right now and you just stay in bed because it's nice and comfortable here.
So you're living system. Yeah well then you can rationalize that.
Sure.
But that's a limbic system driving me to just want to stay in bed or want to hey you know this freaking cotton candy tastes great and I should just eat more of it and just keep shoving into my mouth.
And that's a limbic system in action. That's right and a lot of treatments for phobias and anxiety disorders that are related to cognitive behavioral therapy are progressive exposure.
So a person afraid of snakes you can picture of a snake then you have the imagines snake then they're looking at rubber snake then they're holding a snake.
What are you doing you're you're allowing them to get into small incremental steps of forward action.
They get them closer and closer but you're to the anxiety but you're also ratcheting down the anxiety.
What I'm talking about and I think what the practice is that you've talked a lot about really relate to is recognizing that friction of being tired but
knowing that you should get into action or that feeling of being too amped up and knowing you need to calm down means going against yourself
in a way that is not incremental sometimes can feel huge.
This is why I think you know anyone who's going to try and ice bath don't freeze to death, but you know start at 45 degrees and move your limbs around
and experience what a lot of adrenaline is really like and you know if you do it appropriately you won't die and you will come out of there.
You'll get that dopamine rush and the thing to think about is not how great it feels.
You want to think about how hard it is and then how great it feels.
Those two things need to be coupled in one's mind and the power of mindset is something that has been talked about all the time the secret or on the you know in social media but
I have a colleague at Stanford seems like I only refer to experiments at Stanford but hey it's a good place.
If there is an analog to the seal teens in academia can we borrow that.
Sorry.
There are other good places to there are some schools on the east coast I hear as well.
I'm just kidding but I do that for the home team but there are experiments elsewhere of course but my colleague Ali Chrome.
Her name is Ali but she goes by Ali Chrome is a professor psychology, tenure professor psychology, former division one athlete,
trained clinical psychologists and actually her dad is a martial artist and has done some work with your community.
In credit and she has a few papers on seals and I'll explain what those are.
She studies mind sets and the power of mindset and she studies the physiology so none of this stuff is wishy wash.
And here's the interesting thing you take two groups of people she's taken two groups of people one group watches a movie about stress the other group watches a movie about stress.
The first group watches a movie about stress and learns all the true information about stress disrupts your memory.
It causes deficiencies in decision making and blah blah blah all the terrible things that stress can do the other group.
Learns all the positive things that stress can do can activate your immune system can sharpen your focus can enhance your memory if it's done in the appropriate way etc.
Then you test people with a number of things like memory tests you test their immune system you do blood draws you look at how much stress hormone they're making guess what whatever you learned and believe that's what happens.
They've done the same experiment with two milkshakes.
Okay, you give one group a milkshake you tell them this is a high calorie high fat high sugar milkshake. There's lots of nutrients in it.
You give the other group a milkshake you say this is a modest a low calorie milkshake.
Then you have them drink the milkshake you take blood draws and you look at the insulin response you look at the amount of
insulin which is a hunger hormone that's secreted in response to hunger makes you hungry basically and guess what it's the same milkshake and yet you get higher insulin response to the high calorie.
The thought that it's a high calorie shake you get lower insulin all you still get insulin response in response to the idea that it's a lower calorie shake.
The relevant response is suppressed so you get your hunger doesn't show up for longer if you have the so-called high calorie shake, stays off hunger.
Whereas if you have the low calorie shake you're hungry again earlier and grow in levels go back up really all based on belief and their numerous things like this and so all these words are the best words for this and I'm probably not going to get them exactly right.
But what we do and the physiological consequences of what we do is the consequence of what we do what we eat, how we exercise but also what we believe about what we do.
Now this does not mean that you can just lie to yourself you can't say all of this you know you know four by four from in and out is only a hamburger and it's not going to have a big insulin that doesn't work but what you can do.
What is your protein style?
Pretty safe. Where there's the flying Dutchman I've heard you know that one. I haven't had the voice.
I think that's just meat on a piece of paper. Okay. So now all those carnivores are going to be you know going to that's where I give costella my bulldog.
I think they still use that. The off the menu menu. So basically if you tell yourself the friction that I'm feeling of not wanting to get out of bed and the reward I will feel later actually is building a system within me and that is a true statement.
You will build that system within you. If you believe this is just overcoming pain so that I can drop those pounds so that I don't have to feel terrible about myself well you won't build that system.
And this is the beauty in the mystery of the brain which is that the forebrain can draw on all these contextual things you can really give meaning to what would otherwise just be basic limbic experiences.
There aren't an infinite range of ways to do this. I can't cut myself with this little you know butter knife here and say just kidding because I can't cut myself with this dagger that my fingers barely fill by someone's got some big mitt.
I can't put it through my hand until myself I didn't do that right there are limits to this the laws of physics still apply the laws of physiology still apply.
But as we learn from the example of the milkshakes or the example about stress positive or negative learnings about stress there is a range of physiology that we can experience according to something.
I think this has important implications to for things like PTSD interpreting the experiences of past just telling oneself it wasn't that big of a deal won't work but telling oneself that there's no way to come back from that.
Also is not true. There's a couple of things that I've been I've been talking about for a while the one I'm going to start with is this idea I've been telling people for a while hey listen.
Yeah got tendencies so we all have different tendencies you might have a tendency let's say from a leadership perspective that you're a micromanager and you've got to be aware of that tendency because if you don't.
If you're not aware of it and you don't try and counter it you're going to always end up micromanaging maybe you have a a tendency to be hyper aggressive and you're too aggressive and you go and make you try to run to the sound of the guns without really taking a step back.
So you have to understand what your tendencies are and then you've got to say my tendency also might be right so now I'm thinking about this from and I also say hey listen as a leader.
I'm not watching the crowd and you've got to pay attention to make sure that the crowd is going in the right direction when the crowd starts to get fired up about something like yeah we need to go assault that building we need to go assault that building.
You should say to yourself you should think to yourself the contrary you should think okay wait a second is that the right thing to do right now because it's really easy to get caught up in the crowd.
I'm noticing a similar thing with our limbic system like there's a chance that your limbic system is correct. Absolutely. But you need to be aware of the tendency of your limbic system and make sure that what that freaking.
Little tiny part of your animal brain is thinking you need to put it in check and sometimes you go yep it's the right thing to do right now I should get aggressive I should go on the attack but you need to run it through that check first.
What you're talking about milkshakes and what you're attitude is this is just so clear when you you know from a leadership perspective if we get told hey we got to go freaking do this this mission and it's going to be a real you know a real tough mission it's going to be a weather is horrible.
And that's how you bring it to the boys hey guys we got to ask for this mission it's going to be freaking horrible the weather is going to be bad we're going to be freezing if that's how you bring it to the boys that that's going to be the attitude all day long.
If you come down and you say hey listen check this out there's a mission coming down it looks like the looks like a very tough situation.
They know that we're the only ones that can probably be able to get this done we're going to have this opportunity to go out there and get this get this mission done it's going to be hard but it's going to have a big impact.
Attitude to 180 out right so we have so much control just by what we're thinking and then if you're in a leadership position the way you present things.
It's going to it's going to sway the way people think now I'll also tell you this.
You get told to do something horrible and you truly believe it's horrible and you go down to hey guys this is going to be if you basically lie to them.
What's the the secret of the secret book right that's where it's like hey it's all coming it's very hard to fool someone into that but if you believe hey this is what we're doing this is huge opportunity this can be a tough mission but it's going to be worthwhile if that's what you believe.
You know, I don't know when I heard this but this impacted my whole my whole thoughts on war.
I want to say it might have been Bob dole you know Bob dole was a World War II guy who's wounded you know he never had.
I think one of his hands didn't work very well but I remember hearing him say and I'm pretty sure was him please don't I'm sorry if I'm getting something getting this wrong but.
He said simply put he said war made me better.
And that is the one 80 out of what a lot of guys get told right now war is going to make you crazy it's going to make you depressed it's going to make you an adrenaline junkly won't be any way to satisfy and guys hear that and you're going to have a hard time adjusting and we're going to have to try and assimilate you back into society because it's going to be so hard because of what you see where is Bob dole or whoever this veteran wants to like a war is going to make me better and I always.
I've used that myself I've used that when people have said to me why no do you feel was it hard for you to say when you look back and you've seen you've lost friends is it no all that stuff look it was horrible.
But my perspective is better.
I I appreciate life more because I know that life can be lost very easily I appreciate freedom more because I know the price that was paid for it didn't make me worse actually made me better.
So I think we have to be careful of that kind of thing and you you can also then go down the whole road of like a social contagion where you've got people reinforcing.
Behaviors or reinforcing mindsets and it starts to spread we're now everybody's thinking well you know if you into war you must be messed up and I think I want to why I guess I must be messed up because that's what that's what we're doing and this goes across the board with you know you mentioned the one guy earlier that was.
Cutting the bottom of his feet right and you hear these horrible stories that's a social contagion where.
These outbreaks of of girls primarily girls you know 12 to 16 years old.
Would be cutting themselves and it's something that would oh that's what we're doing it's kind of this these things would spread and you know we talked about I want to wear other podcasts.
I think it was believe believe me right that started a guy wrote an article about it there had been some.
been some small number of cases ever.
Oh right I heard about this a little while and then.
He he wrote an article about it and this is I want to say in the 70s maybe and all of a sudden they have.
Tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands of cases because people said oh they they get this idea and look it is a real thing and then he was reporting or.
You know documenting people this really happened to but once people got that idea was like oh that's what we're doing and you see this with a lot of.
A lot of strange things that are spreading right now in in in America and worldwide where you go hey that's.
That didn't that wasn't a thing not too long ago right that wasn't the thing not too long ago and now it is.
The number of people breaking up with the number of people we know are that that's not a thing and there are.
A couple of reflections some that pertains specifically the seal teams but.
What you're referring to is the fact that nervous systems are profoundly impacting each other so your example of.
The group is getting really ramped up we want to fight let's go you know swift while in action now and you're stepping back as the leader and saying wait.
You're effectively acting as the for brain group that's effectively acting as a limb.
So, and so, nervous systems can be studied in isolation or in groups.
It's harder to do that in the laboratory, although there are people there starting to put
two people into a scanner and having them interact and seeing how the brain areas interact.
It's harder to do for obvious reasons.
Ali Krum's group actually did a study which simply asked, do you think stress harms you
or grows you and measured physiology, cortisol, etc.
And there was only one group that across the board answered stress grows you and it was
seals.
So she's done work on military communities and she's done work on civilians and that's
a published paper you can find it on her website.
She runs our Mind Body Lab at Stanford, really a brilliant person who, I think it's the
experience that resimbed listed off all her credentials or some of her credentials of athlete,
etc.
It understands the Mind Body relationship for a first person experience, not just a geek
and a lab, it's not geek at all actually, but very, very smart.
The other thing is that it's a notion of social contagion and we are profoundly influenced
by sensory experience and one of the most intense sensory experiences or the words and actions
of others.
Some people are drawn more toward or are shifted more by other people's emotional states.
We sometimes hold up empathy as this ideal, but empathy is very dangerous because empathy
for the wrong in the wrong context, you're kid freaking out about an experience at school.
If you freak out, if you experience true empathy, you abandon your own emotional state,
but that's not effective parenting or effective leadership.
So empathy is wonderful only and so far as it allows us to go in understand and then return
to the context and make better decisions.
That's a complicated set of neural operations, but again, it all has to do with a confidence
and a inability to leave your own emotional state going and be comfortable that you can
get back out.
So empathy is a double-sided blade, really.
Interestingly, I'll have the idea of empathy raised with me a lot through leadership.
You know, isn't it important to be empathetic and I've always made a distinction between,
well, what I really want to do is I want to be better at understanding what your perspective is.
So I want to truly understand what your perspective is, but I don't really want to actually
feel what you're feeling because now I've, I might have messed up what I'm trying to,
what my perspective is and by the way, I want to get as many different perspectives
as I can so that I can fully see the problem and understand it from the maximum number
of angles so now I can most easily find a solution.
Whereas if I dive in to just looking, it feeling the way you're feeling, that's not good.
So, you can both drown and you know, you can both drown.
It's the jumping into the river to save somebody and you can both drown.
I like this notion of perspective because inability to see throughout the lens of other
people is extremely important, obviously, but the ability to return to one's own internal
state is obviously that the one of the hallmarks of great leadership, as you know, the
idea of groups and how bad things spread between groups is that there's, this will explain
a lot of what we see on social media and then the press, there was a set of controversial
but nonetheless important experiments done in the 1960s by a guy named Robert Heath.
So, that time when you could sign up for an experiment, have electrodes put into your head
and you could, for a nominal amount of money, you could stimulate the electrodes located
at different locations and tell Dr. Robert Heath what you're experiencing.
This is three papers, some of which were published in the journal Science, which is one of our
kind of Super Bowl.
We have the Super Bowl NBA Championship and you know, Stanley Cup of Science and they are
nature science and cell.
Those are the three top journals, Science is a very good journal.
He published this paper basically subjects were allowed to stimulate a variety of different
areas of their brain in their own brain.
In their own brain.
Okay.
Stimulate one area and the person that he'd say, what do you feel?
They'd say, a little drunk, stimulate another area, what do you feel?
Kind of giddy, what do you feel a little bit of anger, et cetera?
And then he would just tell people, you can stimulate an area that you want but you have
only ten minutes to do it.
So, they'd play around on the keyboards to, again, come to this experiment now but really
cool experiment.
The area that all the subjects chose to stimulate the most far more, more, excuse me than
other areas is an area of the midline columnist for what it's worth and the subjective
experience that they all reported, mild frustration and anger.
You know what this going on here?
Why would human beings want to feel frustration and anger?
Well, it turns out that this medial thalamus area is linked up with the dopamine system.
We may not like limbic friction of the sort like overcoming fatigue to go exercise or
stress and needing to calm down but human beings seem to love the feeling of being pissed off
just a little bit.
And I mentioned this not because I like this result.
I kind of hate this result but I guess that just speaks to the result itself which is that
there's something about it which feels motivating.
Anger feels good at a low level because it puts us into a state of activation and we
like states of activation and relaxation and guess what?
It puts us in a state of activation without us having to do anything.
We're right back where we were before.
Dopamine hits without any effort.
Being angry is a dopamine hit without having to do anything and people will sit there all
day and I confess their times, no one's ever put a negative comment on our comments
in my Instagram.
And you want, why do we orient to those?
Well, we could say, oh, it hurts.
Actually, frankly, unless it's something I really need to pay attention, I don't really care
because typically there of a nature that's not really meaningful that doesn't come from
a place of understanding or, you know, I don't like misunderstandings.
I do read comments but you want people to understand things but when people are just
mean spirited, we'll find ourselves orienting towards those because being a little angry turns
out to be a dopamine hit.
And I've become very conscious of this because I think social media is a place where we
can all get drawn down these paths where you can spend all day in a battle in your head
that doesn't mean anything or worse you can respond to things in a way that can sink
your whole career.
You see this?
I mean, the chair of the psychiatry department at Columbia University was fired for a tweet
that was just a very insensitive tweet.
It wasn't an anger-based tweet but that just tells me there was a picture of a model and
he made a very insensitive remark about her genetic lineage.
I just don't even want to read it.
I don't want to restate it because it was-
How long ago was this?
So there's recently people who can Google it.
I don't know what went through his mind but here's what I know.
It's just a psychiatrist.
He's one of the leading psychiatrists in the world and he couldn't think to steps ahead
for whatever reason.
You know, it's interesting we've been giving a hard time to Instagram a bunch today but
now you start talking about.
Now we're talking about Twitter because it is crazy.
There's people that are you can see it when you read through what they're writing.
They are feeling legitimate.
Angle.
I'm like you.
I'll read something like, oh, it's kind of funny.
What are you doing?
Even when people are saying-
Yeah, the person feels powerless.
I can see it.
I see their common and I go, gosh, they must really feel powerless in this world and I feel
sad for them but they are pissed.
So they're getting a little dopamine hit by creating just friction and mayhem and I think
a lot of people show up.
I hate to demonize Twitter but I have to say Instagram's a pretty kind place on average.
I think there is a certain category of people that show up to Twitter to experience that
form of dopamine hit.
They are there to fight.
But they're not there to fight outright.
They're not going to meet you in the parking lot.
They're not going to go toe to toe on a data point.
They'd rather go through and kind of find little misunderstandings and then hijack misunderstanding
to try and elevate their status within this so-called fight.
And if you think about the range of meaningless circular career and life diminishing behaviors,
this would be at the near the top of the list.
This is like the poor guy in the parking lot who's organizing leaves in the corner and
you go, he's lost his mind.
It's really sad.
Except these are people who arguably still have a mind to reach out.
So this is, you know, arguably.
So when I saw those Robert Keith results, I thought, gosh, people don't like to be angry.
People don't like to be pissed off and yet that low level anger and frustration has direct
links to the reward pathway.
And I think we would all be wise to know when we're drifting toward that because we are
all Kate, if listen, if this circuitry exists and us, we're all capable of it.
I believe the Carl Jung State minimum though, I'm not a psychologist.
We have all things inside of us.
Well, it's also, I'm sitting here painting myself with very guilty because if you think
about listening to hardcore music, this is, this is music that is fueled by anger and
fuels anger and it feels good.
Like the first time I ever heard like the crow mags, I was like, oh, I, this is what I want
to listen to now.
Like this is it.
You know, the first time you hear a gnaz to front, you're like, okay, this is what I want
to listen to now because you get that little, you get that hit.
So that got me hook line and sink or man.
But you channeled it into something.
So that's anger and dopamine without effort.
But then you took that and you applied it to something.
You listened to it while you train.
You orient towards a mindset.
You know, the examples are very nuanced and particular to ourselves.
So they're not even worth sharing, but they're songs and things in my head that I hear
that allow me to show up a better person.
And I'm actually not the first to discuss as the great neurologist Oliver Sachs wrote about
this, you know, he wrote the book of Wake and Innings and he wrote the menu, Mr. Kizwai
for Had.
It was looked at clinical abnormalities and taught people about how the brain works and
based on how it breaks in these beautiful books.
But he was also held the California State Record for Back Squat.
Respect.
They all know about these books.
You're talking about whatever.
I don't know about these psychological things you're saying, but record him back squat.
Exactly.
Yeah, this is a guy who was serious about his physical training.
He talked about this.
He talked about anchoring to emotional states through, for him, listening to classical music,
then being able to access creative works of writing.
Being able to listen to angry, he talked even about things that evoke anger and then
being able to take that anger and bring that to his ability to work very long hours
in the clinic to help people that were on words of hospitals that no one would dare go
down, let alone go in there and help these people.
These are just imagine the worst place to ever be placed as a Parkinson's patient or an
Alzheimer's.
These are torture chambers that he would go into and he would take people out of the hospital.
He did incredible humanitarian works.
He talked about channeling these reflexive tendencies toward good and toward building a career
in a life.
I think listening to the chromaags, if you can put you put that into something useful,
just sitting there in your room and just listening to over and over endlessly and not
leaving to be angry at the world or looking at what the Columbine kids did, just pissed off
at everybody and then going and just hosing a cafeteria with bullets, well, obviously,
it can go either way.
I think that learning to harness these more primitive states is very useful.
We can't eliminate these states.
We can't pretend they don't exist, but you can funnel them into real, not just benevolent,
but really human species growing actions.
I think this is another just to bring up this word awareness again.
We got some awareness now of the dopamine and what that crash is going to feel like.
Now we can start to put that into the calculus of how we're behaving.
We're talking about the limbic system and understanding and being aware of what the limbic
system is trying to do and that it may or may not be leading you in the right direction,
but you need to use your own brain to put that thing in check and either go with it or say,
no, not right now.
So these things to become aware of these things, very important.
And what you said, this kind of thing has only been around for a limited amount of time.
For most of human history, it's been happening.
Yeah, well, the effort to get the dopamine reward has been there.
There was a time in which violent battle was adaptive and there still times where violent
battle was adaptive and then there are times when it'll completely sink your life.
I mean, I think that we're in a very important time right now where we can trigger activation
of all these neural circuitrys sitting at home.
We don't even have to get out of bed.
But we see, I think the explosion of mental illness, the explosion of anxiety and depression
in ADHD is absolutely the consequence of ready availability of pleasures without effort.
Lack of understanding about how our own basic physiology works.
I have great respect for the fields of psychology, great respect.
But thinking about your thinking is useful, but knowing that you can put a wedge in between
your thinking and your physiology is also useful, not better, but also useful.
And so for instance, if you're somebody who suffers from anxiety, practice physiological
size, long exales, if you're somebody who feels a motivated, think about how much pleasure
you're, or sensory stuff and food and stuff you're consuming without effort first, start
to embrace this idea that effort followed by reward, repeat, effort, reward, repeat is not
just something that I'm saying.
It's been the signature pattern of life progression and individuals.
It's been the signature pattern of the evolution of our species that was 2,000 years ago.
That's true today and it's likely going to be true 1,000 years from now.
I mean, I love the idea that companies like Neural Lincoln, Stuffer, can develop little devices.
You just trigger your motivation circuitry, but guess what?
Dopamine is a non-infinite but renewable resource.
If you just dump all your dopamine because you stimulate with an electrode, you know this
from experiments in the lab.
You keep triggering those brain areas.
You're not going to be a motivated person 24 hours a day.
You're just going to deplete all your dopamine.
So unless they have a plan to also put dopamine back in the system, there's no neurotechnologies
that are going to overcome the technology of the brain completely.
You can augment it, but you're not going to overcome it.
You're not going to build a cyborg warrior that completely discards with the human element
because everything that you've talked about in terms of leadership and self-control, all
these four brain circuits, and I've been describing the four brain as one thing, like a
break on the limbic system.
We're an accelerator on the limbic system.
But it's really like spinning multiple plates.
The ability to use your four brain, it feels hard, feels like effort even if you're just
sitting in a chair because you have to spin a plate over here and then you have to spin
a plate over.
You have to think, okay, those guys are going to go there.
Then they're going to arrive at this time.
Then I'm going to arrive at this time.
A lot of people just go, ah, they were like overwhelmed.
You have to calm yourself as you know and think, okay, then when they arrive and this, I mean,
what are these plates that's been giving me a little bit?
These are, I think about the four brain circuits as working in parallel.
You don't have one four brain.
You have maybe five or six four brain circuits.
The simple operation would be lifting up this drink to drink it.
A more complicated thing would be trying to think about doing this every time Echo puts
his hand on his chin throughout the whole podcast while we're having a conversation.
Now I have to spin multiple plates.
I have to keep things going in real time.
It's a trivial example because it's not important when he does that.
But it allows me to demonstrate that we can contextualize anything.
We can say, you know, every time that shadow moves to the left just a little bit, you know,
did that shadow move?
I don't know if that shadow moves.
That's a lot of vigilance, but sure, you can occupy your whole four brain with that,
or you can do that while paying attention to how many guys are out on the ground or moving
behind you.
So the four brain, it goes under high demand.
When we sleep, we regain the capacity to do that multiple plate spinning type of operation.
And when you go into non-sleep deep rest, when we turn off that effort, we reinstate that
effort.
I'll just mention one experiment.
There's done out of a lab in Scandinavia.
They had people just lie down and do a yoga knee to your type, non- or just you could
go online and do NSDR, just do NSDR made for it.
It's a free script.
You can listen to this, do it for 30 minutes.
They found that when people do that sort of exercise of just deliberate decompression, not
engaging their four brain, doing long exhales, the amount of dopamine in a brain structure
called the basal ganglia was replenished.
That's very important.
The basal ganglia are involved in directing go actions and no go.
One way that people can get better controlling their behavior in limbic friction is, I do
this actually.
I'm slightly embarrassed but also proud to say 20 times a day, I find myself wanting to do
something like pick up the phone.
I've been wanting to pick up that little paper clip and this whole podcast because I like
it for a reason that I'm interested in.
Not allowing myself to do it.
For a reason that they don't are trivial, but what am I doing?
I'm engaging the no-go pathway.
So try and learn to overcome limbic friction by forcing yourself to do things that you don't
want to do.
Try and force yourself to not do things that you want to do, even trivial things and what
you're doing is you're building up these little circuitries and the basal ganglia depend
on dopamine.
Different receptors for go and no go but dopamine.
Deep relaxation retours your ability to do this.
Remember, non-infinite but renewable.
So the more plate spinning, the more go-no goes you perform throughout the day, the more
you deplete the circuitry.
30 minutes of a non-sleep deep rest or a good night sleep, whatever that means for you,
reinstates those dopamine levels.
So at the end of the day, we're more than a bag of chemicals but this stuff has been
baked into us.
So check this out.
Something I've been teaching a decent amount lately and it just would be very interesting
to see how this overlays on your spinning plates.
So I've been trying to teach people, I got asked a question.
I was up at an event and at this event, some of my guys that worked for me in the
SEAL teams were their late-fab and inter-Paul and these guys happened to tell a couple stories
where like, oh, you know, Jocco did this.
He made this decision right here and it was great and then you know, Andrew got up and say,
oh, this other time, Jocco made.
And so they painted me in a great light, maybe look really cool and you know, I was kind
of, you know, my ego is inflating and then during one of the breaks, a couple of guys that
were there.
These are business guys.
They come up and you know, you know, you have just such great instincts.
So obvious, you know, as a leader that you just have these great instincts and I was kind
of like, yeah, you know, it's pretty, I'm really, I'm really good instincts and they kind
of inflated my ego and I felt great about myself.
And then I went back, we were out the woods and I went back to my little cabin and I started
thinking myself, let me second.
First of all, if the only thing I have is good leadership instincts and I'm just a good
natural leader and that's what I have, what good is it to me to be able to talk to anyone
else about it, if it's just something that I naturally have that no one else can have.
That doesn't make any sense.
And I said, and by the way, I know for a fact, I didn't always have these things.
So then I started thinking about, well, how do I actually make decisions when I've got
a bunch of chaotic things going on?
And I sat down and I wrote down what I do in my brain when things are happening, when things
are going on, when there's an enemy contact, when there's a problem out on the battlefield,
or when does a business problem?
What am I doing?
And I wrote down sort of these things that I think about.
And I ended up saying, hey, this is where we went back later that night and I said, hey,
you guys asked me this question to ask me about my instinct.
Well, let me tell you it's not instinct.
I am running a loop in my head to check that I am going in the right direction.
Number one thing I always think about is time.
How much time do I have right now?
Something's going on and I have to make a decision.
Do I have 20 minutes to make that decision?
Do I have three minutes to make?
Do I have to make a decision right now?
I think about the fundamental laws of combat that we talk about all the time.
Like, hey, are we going to support each other if I make this decision?
Is it going to help us as a team if I make this decision?
Oh, and by the way, can I communicate it simply?
Okay, if I can communicate it simply great.
Hey, where does this fall on our priority list?
What number priorities?
Is this a higher priority than what we've been doing?
Do I need to shift priorities?
Do I need to tell everyone to shift priorities?
Or does this not fit the top priority?
Decentralized command.
Can I get someone, can I delegate this problem to someone else?
Can I give it to them so that I can then look up and out?
And I had this, so I went through this list of things.
Hey, is this part of the mission that we're actually trying to do?
Because sometimes you're on a mission and you get distracted by something else and all of a sudden
you get focused on that.
You can't allow yourself to do that.
And I had this whole list of things of these thoughts that I will go through.
And the most important thing as I get done telling, explaining this list of things to people
was you can't get caught on any one of these things.
If you get caught on the time factor, you'll never figure out if this is actually part
of the mission.
If you only focused on, hey, is this part of our mission, you might run out of time before
you make an decision.
So in my mind, when you talk about these spinning plates, I get it.
And what I realize and when you were talking about looking at a shadow and paying attention
to it, you do have to pay attention.
You have to check on it, but you can't forget about everything else that's going on.
So this is an interesting dynamic when I hear these that my frontal lobe has these spinning
plates.
Well, I know that I can't really pay attention to them all at the same time.
So I have to kind of check this one, give it a little spin, check this one, balance it,
check this one, balance it.
And if I get focused on one, another one's going to get dropped.
So that's what I do is I go through and I look, okay, let me check this.
Let me check this, let me check this and I keep going around in a circle, in a loop.
And this can all happen in a half a second.
You can do all these things over and over again.
But if you get stuck in one of these things, you're going to fall apart.
And this goes back to your vertibus eutolope, observe or you're going to side and act
it's the same thing.
You have to keep it moving.
And if you get stuck on trying to decide what to do, if you get, I can't make a decision,
you're going to fall apart.
If you get stuck in action, which some people think, oh, that'd be good.
You're taking action.
But you're not running the feedback and seeing how this action is affecting everything
else that's happening around you.
You have to do the action, then you have to go back and observe how it's impacting the
scenario.
And in orient yourself to where you are now.
And then decide if that was a good action or not.
So this idea of spinning plates is very interesting to me because they're out there.
I know that I know that there's times when I have all these plates spinning.
And I know that if I get focused on one of those spinning plates, I'm going to drop some
other ones and then everything's going to fall apart.
Yeah, it's what the examples you provide are really key because first of all, it's
high demand work.
You know, one can get comfortable.
What we're referring to is spinning plates.
Some people experience overwhelmed trying to do two things.
We so value this notion of focus and focus is wonderful.
But we sometimes forget that the brain does not have one in spotlight of focus.
The way to think about focus is that we are old world primates and we can do something
called covert attention.
So I can talk to you, pay attention to you, but I can also pay attention to echo.
I've got two spotlights.
I can intensify a spotlight.
You can start to pay attention to some specific feature of what you're saying or doing.
And as I do that, he starts to disappear a little bit and then I can switch.
These are the attentional mechanisms of the forebrain.
If you want to play that game, I assure you if we put you in a scanner, your prefrontal
cortex would be lighting up like crazy, meaning high levels of metabolic activity there.
I can also take those two spotlights and merge them to a single location.
I can make them more intense.
I can broaden them and I can make them more diffuse.
We don't have three spotlights.
We have two.
But we don't just have one.
And so if you understand attention as two spotlights, maybe one that's right there and one
that's drifting, maybe two that can merge to a specific location.
Or if you need to, when we talk about spinning multiple plates, what we're talking about
is toggling back and moving those spotlights and knowing that at one point as you describe
attention will truly be off some element.
Which element is off of and what it's on is crucial in high-stakes, high consequences scenarios
like you described it's vital to survival.
So we can learn how to do this, however.
Putting on a sit down and read a book without any distraction, or I actually like to put
my phone right next to me and do a bunch of no-goes.
Every time that thing calls me, I just give it a little, oh no, FU.
No.
And I, you know, you're practicing the no-go pathway and reading a book.
The other thing that's very useful for developing focus is something that people don't
do often enough anymore, including me, which is writing in complete sentences.
The ability to write and think in complete sentences is hard work.
I have a colleague at Stanford Carl Diceroth, he no doubt will win a no-go prize, is a psychiatrist
in a bio-engineer and incredibly successful in science also as five kids practicing clinical
psychiatrist.
And I asked him, you know, what is your tool?
What in the world are you doing?
And he says, well, at least once every 24 hours, I sit down in a chair and I force myself
to stay completely motionless and think only in complete sentences for about a half an hour.
I try doing this for about five minutes, it is really tough.
I invite anyone to try and only writing complete sentences for five minutes when they
journal as opposed to, you know, texting, we tend to use, you know, descriptive clauses
and we tend to do fragments now and we're starting, now the brain thinks in kind of
fragments and symbols and that's very efficient.
We wouldn't want to only think in complete sentences.
But by writing in complete sentences, by forcing that pain over writing or that pain of
thinking in a structured way, you are building up, you are reinforcing the neural circuits
that support that so-called spinning of multiple plates, the ability to move the spotlight
to a single location.
You're learning at a harness the spotlight at one location.
And so I think a lot of people don't realize they can train these circuits related to
attention.
You might say, well, how could writing complete sentences help me multitask?
That doesn't make any sense.
Ah, you're still taking control of these attentional systems.
It's like learning how to operate any vehicle.
Of course, it's not going to allow you to operate that vehicle in every context and in
every way that vehicle could be operated.
But you're learning the basic mechanics of attention when you force yourself to write
in complete sentences to think or speak in complete sentences.
This is why I do the long podcast.
I do these two and a half hour podcasts by myself and it's hard.
And I think, this is hard, but I can't just say a half a sentence and then just drop it
because I know that the rest of what I wanted to say.
It's work, but it feels good.
And this is the other element, which is that over time the dopamine system can be woven
into the systems that control effort.
I guess the notion of growth mindset is learning to cope, carol-du-ax beautiful work,
is learning to couple the notion that effort is good for us.
But neurochemically we can start to experience friction and think, ah, this is growing
me.
You know, in any other context, it would be corny, but in this context and because of a
newly accram study of Navy SEALs, I can appropriately say, learn to think about effort
like a seal would, which is this is growing me.
In that thought, you are releasing dopamine in response to effort.
In other words, the more friction you always say, good, more friction, good.
I actually think about that a lot.
I had some trying circumstances recently, an uninteresting forsake of this podcast.
And I thought, god, this is either going to make or break us and I thought, what if I just
decided that the more stress now, the better it's going to be?
It's instantaneous, but then you have to keep doing that.
When you wake up, sleep deprived, you have to do it again.
When someone triggers, you have to do it again.
I love the Udalupe.
I love that you raised for the first time I heard you, someone raised the Udalupe, not
as something that's done once, but it's done over and over and over.
It's Udalupe's plural.
I think we always hear about it as a unitary thing, but it's Udalupe's like you're in
observation over here and you're in action on this one.
It's multiple Udalupe's.
Yep.
And by the way, you're running like a tactical low level, real-time short-term Udalupe for
what I'm going to get out of this right now, but at the same time you're running a bigger
Udalupe, or you should be a strategic Udalupe that's looking at like, well, how is this
going to affect me six months from now?
And then you've got to even bigger one that's going five years.
That's the actual.
All these different Udalupe's going on at the same time that you have to be running.
Forgive me, I didn't mean to interrupt.
That's the forb.
I was just too excited.
I couldn't, I didn't suppress my forb.
The interrupting is a forb, rain, limbic friction glitch.
Forgive me.
That's your forb, rain, accessing the library of past, present, and future.
You know, this, when you talk about, here's another interesting crossover.
So a lot of times when I talk about people taking a step back, taking a breath, looking
around, it's the word I use for them.
But for doing that is detach.
You have to detach from the chaos in the mayhem.
You have to detach from your own emotions.
Well, interestingly, another thing I will tell people, when they've got more of a, let's
say a slow burning problem that they want to figure out a solution for, one of the things
I recommend they do is they write down what the problem is, write down what some various
solutions are, and what that does is it literally detaches you from the problem because
now you're having to think through really what this problem is and how you're going to articulate
it on a piece of paper for yourself.
And then you're going to look at it from a detached perspective.
You're going to read the words that you're wrote.
And it really does, it really does allow you to see a new perspective and hopefully find
a solution.
Another thing I've been saying a lot lately is the solutions to your problem are not in the
problem.
When you have a problem, the solutions are not in there.
If the solutions were in there, you just, it wouldn't be a problem.
You just saw it.
You have to get outside the problem.
You have to figure out how to take a step back, how to see it from a different perspective.
Because if the solution to the problem was in the problem, you would just execute on that
thing.
It wouldn't even be an issue.
So we have to take a step back and one of the best ways to do that if you have the
time and the opportunity to do it and then usually in what we call the military and administrative
situation.
Well, it's fine.
Sit down, write down what is going on, what the problem is.
Maybe what some ideas are about viable solutions.
But I think it's even better to really detail what you see the problem is because if you start
trying to write down solutions, you're already, you're already trying to impose solutions
on it.
Write down what the problem is.
Look at it.
Take walk away from it.
Come back and read it again.
And you're going to start to see that you're going to have a better chance of finding
a solution than if you're living inside the problem.
Yeah, I love that.
I need to do it more often.
I used to journal all the time.
One of the problems with the phone is that it includes the ability of write down a quick
note.
I'll use the notes function where I'll put something into my voice memos.
But anytime I go back, it's very fragmented.
I think that writing and writing in complete sentences or diagramming is enormously powerful.
I also, there was something you said that I need to think about in terms of disability
to zoom out.
We don't really know what that is.
But the feeling of being in, we wake up every day and we recognize ourselves in the mirror.
Amazing if you think about it.
We never wonder if we're somebody else if provided we're not psychotic.
Wait a second.
Let me catch up with the event that we hear because I'm trying to figure out why it's
amazing that I realize and recognize myself in the mirror.
Why is that amazing?
Well, we don't really know where the notion of the self sits in the nervous system.
And yet we go through life, always experiencing things from a frame of reference of ourselves.
A few people experience out of body stuff.
There's a big effort now, of course, to use ketamine type therapies and dissociative and
aesthetics to help people move out of trauma.
This is a work that's being done in clinics.
And I've never tried these things or been part of these trials.
But every time I hear a patient's report about it, they say, I experience myself as getting
out of the car, seeing myself in the car of myself.
Like, you know, normally we wake up in our body and we go, I think that's amazing.
But in any of them in the mirror scientists.
I want to understand where you're perspective is.
Yeah, yeah.
It's incredible because it's, and we don't know where that sits.
There's no brain region or brain circuit.
There's no clinical syndrome that people dissociate from self in that way.
Maybe multiple personalities, but that's more rare than most people believe.
But dissociative states are rare.
And so we go through life mostly from this perspective of meaning, meaning me.
One thing that's been very helpful to me, at least, has been a colleague.
Again, Carl Diceraw said, you know, most of the time, we have no idea how other people
feel.
In fact, most of the time, we don't even know how we feel.
We don't even know how to.
We don't even have a language that can explain feelings.
I don't know if how you feel right now.
It relates at all to my understanding of how you feel.
We can start really drifting into the weird and abstracting.
As you've noticed up until now, I'm a pretty nuts and bolts guy.
I like physiology.
I love physiology of the nervous system and hormone systems.
That's mainly what I've worked on.
But I like actionable tools.
I like, you know, in the military, right, I have to assume that before a gunfight, you can't
just say, all right, guys, be brave and go in with a full heart.
Right, you need, like, this is what happens when X happens.
You need plans.
You need protocols.
And in science and neuroscience, there are now protocols.
We've been talking about those.
But then there are the more abstract notions of the self and others and how to do that.
And I think that's really where the future of neuroscience lies is in trying to parse some
of those deeper understandings.
I don't have any knowledge to shed on that.
All I can say is that we all are very self-oriented.
We all tend to approach life through the lens of self.
And so I'm struck again and again when I read your book and when talking today, your ability
to this notion of taking other perspectives.
I think that's probably hard work for most people.
That occurs to me as something that's probably just as important to practice as writing
in complete sentences.
Yeah, I have a couple triggers that I use when you approach me with your plan.
And your plan doesn't make sense to me.
That immediately tells me, okay, he sees something.
I don't see.
I need to try and get in his head.
I need to try and figure out what his perspective is.
When you're mad, you come into my office and I can see that you're mad.
I immediately, I'm not thinking what's wrong with him.
I'm thinking of what is he see that I don't see.
And yeah, that's a critical part of not only just leadership, but just interacting
with other human beings.
You know, if you're, when I'm married, I've been married for a long time.
When my wife, I can see a look on her face.
She's not happy.
I think what is happening, what is she seeing?
What's her perspective on this that's making her not happy right now?
Because it's not going to benefit me to have her continue down this path.
And it's usually something that I can make an adjustment on pretty quickly.
And allow her to see maybe what some of what I'm seeing or allow her to see a little bit
of a different perspective.
So, yeah, extremely important.
Don't you ever do some things like even as a scientist where you're, do running an
experiment and you get done and it kind of felt like it was just kind of happening, like
you weren't.
Like, you know, they say I definitely have felt that way.
I feel like, you know, if I'm doing Gigiitsu, have a good role.
Man, I'm not in there.
I'm kind of watching.
You want to do that.
You want to be able to detach.
Do you have that in your business?
Yeah, that, you know, people talk about flow states.
And I'm friendly with Stephen Kotler.
And so I like to joke about flow.
The most thing that, the most that we can say about flow at this point in history is that
backwards it spells wolf.
I mean, I don't think we really know how that's generated in the brain.
Because some people describe it as a sense of losing time and being really in the experience.
Other people describe it as being, you know, kind of third personing the experience.
And so, this is more of a call to action for more definition about what flow is.
It probably, probably five different kinds of flow.
I've certainly had the experience of automaticity where I'm like, who's actually doing
this stuff?
You know, you get into these action patterns that are so trained.
You're just watching yourself, you know, from you, it would be really nerdy stuff.
I can dissect a retina like nobody else.
Like, but that way, if you need me to take out an eyeball and put a retina on and then
get under a microscope, like, I'm your guy.
I've done it so many hundreds of thousands of times.
And so, from so many different eyeballs, everything from human eyeballs right down to, you know,
a marmuset eyeball.
So, I'm the guy for that.
But typically, I think I'm not used to third personing quite as much.
I've certainly situations.
I try and look at situations.
I tend to do it by assembling a small team.
So if they're data, I don't, they don't make sense.
Or, my podcast team, my love working in small group of guys.
And we, you know, whiteboard, what do we want to do?
How do we want to structure things?
So I tend to outsource my forebrain.
One of the things that you see in, and I'm not describing myself here, but in creatives,
they need handlers.
People that are very creative learn to put those spotlights into their creative endeavour
so much so that making toast is work.
And so they tend to, as they achieve more success, dedicating more and more of the everyday
things to other people in an effort to try and get in that narrow trench.
And so they're really taking, instead of trying to spin multiple plates related to multiple
things, they're like, let's get all the plates spinning in unison and just focus on this.
And that could be very beneficial.
But it does tend to take away that ability to outsource and be a multitasker.
And so I think success is a dangerous thing in that way.
Because the further up you go in science, the fewer experiments you're doing and the
more you're just focused on narrow things.
And there, sometimes people bring me data and I'll say, oh, that means this.
And like, no, that means that.
And I'm like, well, I've been doing this a lot longer than you have.
And I'm, well, the professor at Stanford, then I went think to myself, I'm way say,
they're a lot closer to the data than I am.
And so we sit back and look at it as a group.
So I tend to do it through groups.
But I'll be on the lookout for this.
Anytime you've described third personning or this notion of good growth from stress, great.
Now I know why you say that.
I think we can put a neuroscience definition on that because more stress equals more growth.
Something that most people don't believe in alley crumbs, work, research on the seal
teams, indicates if not proves that they believe this.
More stress equals more growth.
I think that's something that I'm certainly trying to adopt more and more in my life.
Especially as I get older, we tend to get a little complacent in certain our ways.
No.
Well, not you, but we, no, not you either.
People in general, some of us tend to default towards the things that feel good and move
away from friction.
But if friction is the lever for growth and more friction equals more growth, and absolutely
it does, well, then your statement good makes complete sense.
So, what do we, what do we do in food wise?
How, how deeper you into diet food?
What are we doing?
We know we get, let's, let's go back to, you know, we woke up in the morning.
We got some, we got some light, we did some workout, we haven't taken any caffeine yet.
We maybe we hopped in the cold bath.
Now it's start, you know, now the day is moving along.
At what point are we eating?
11 a.m.
Very similar to me.
What are we eating at 11 a.m.?
I mean, I'm laughing as I, in size, I say this because recently, if you want to engage those
neural circuits for battle online, just talk about nutrition or training.
Oh, yeah.
You know, I'm going to talk about what works for me.
And I'm 46 and I'm happy that I can run far, not too fast, but I can run far, and I
can lift objects that certainly are not the heaviest objects in any environment, but I'm
comfortable with my strength and endurance.
And I feel good.
That's what matters to me.
And then I can focus, and I can work even after I train.
So when I wake up, I'm going to hydrate 90 minutes to two hours later, I'm going to drink
caffeine, which is typically yerbomate, pour over yerbomate, not the smoky ones turns
out.
The smoky ones are loaded with carcinogens, so that's bad as smoking.
That sounds fine.
Really bad, but I like that stuff a lot.
And I'm not just saying this to make you guys happy.
I'm loving these energy drinks.
I've been drinking them for a few weeks now, so loving it.
Also because I don't like sucralose.
Oh, yeah.
You did the ingredient check.
I did the ingredient check.
And it's not, I don't dislike sucralose because I think it's going to kill my microbiome.
I'm not trying to be catastrophic about it.
I just don't like the way it tastes.
But I think Monk Fruit's DVA Tamir Fine.
I like occasionally have some ass per team.
I'm not a big consumer of ass per team, but yeah, the fact that it's sweet and with
monk fruit, I like, no, they're not paying me to say this.
I really like this stuff.
Although I'd be happy to work with you guys.
I think I want to just be clear.
The alpha GPC is something that I take in supplement form, unless I'm having drinking
something that has alpha GPC in it.
They're good data on it.
Alpha GPC is basically a co-lean donor increases the cdocolline, which is a molecule released
from the nucleus basalis of my Nurt, my Nurt was the anatomus, that helps enhance the intensity
of those spotlights to put sort of a general description on it and the ability to engage
those spotlights.
So, alpha G, why we put it in there?
So alpha GPC is something that, you know, and there's some evidence that it can offset
some age-related cognitive decline in those kinds of things.
So there are a number of things in there that I like.
So I'll drink some caffeine.
I trained in the early part of the day.
That I can just quickly say that, or we can talk about training separately, but I hit
the weights every other day.
I run on the days I don't train with weights, and I do all workouts for about an hour.
Very basic, but I'm doing that for 30 years.
I train, you know, I can get into the details, but you know, anyway.
The food thing is, basically after I train, I can last about an hour or so before I'm
really hungry, and then I'll typically have some fruit and some starch.
If I've trained hard, if it's a glycogen depleting workout, you know, hit the weights,
then I'll have a big bowl of oatmeal and some fruit, and I make sure I actually like
throwing a little bit of butter and some fish oil in there, and, you know, some fats
and a protein drink.
At 11, and then around 130 or two, I want a real meal.
And on the days when I don't train with the weights, I typically don't have that oatmeal,
protein drink meal.
Instead, I'll have a real meal right at 11 or so.
And typically it's a piece of meat, a piece of grass fed meat.
Usually at stake, I do not like chicken.
I don't know why.
It just doesn't appeal to me.
I'll eat it if I have to.
I might have a piece of salmon, but I'm not crazy about salmon.
I'll have a piece of grass fed beef, like a rib eye or a hamburger patty or two and a salad.
And maybe I'll have a slice of bread or something, a good bread.
Usually not.
And then through the afternoon, I'm good.
I typically will work anytime I'm not training or eating.
I try and just eat and not do work at the same time, but often times I'm eating while
I'm eating while I'm working.
So I have lunch and take care of some email.
And then in the afternoon, I will do, after lunch, I'll typically lie down and do an
NSTR, get a little nap, wake up, and sleep sleep.
Where I'll go under into the state of deep relaxation for 10 to 30 minutes.
And then I can really do another work about in the afternoon.
So I do some work in the morning, obviously.
I work out in the morning.
I eat at 11, the post workout and then a lunch or just the lunch if I didn't work
out with the weights.
And then I will do a little bit of deep relaxation, 10 to 30 minutes.
Get up from that.
Hydrate, I'll typically take a quick walk outside.
So none of that takes more than about 15 minutes.
And then I try and drop into another work about.
And throughout the afternoon, yeah.
Yeah, because I think of these as 90 minutes of work, the brain functions and what
are called all trading cycles.
We have circadian, which means 24, all trading, which is 90 minutes cycles.
All your sleep is broken up into 90 minutes cycles.
All your waking states are broken up into 90 minutes cycles.
With some training, you can teach yourself to focus really hard on something for about 90 minutes.
But sometimes it's email, sometimes it's writing, sometimes it's data analysis, sometimes
it's podcast prep, et cetera.
But after about 90 minutes of intense work, I try and take a minute, view a horizon, relax,
walk around.
I try not to look at my phone.
And then I'll go back into another bout of work.
So I'm getting three or four intense bout to work throughout the day.
And then I'm not eating in the afternoon throughout that afternoon.
I had one or two meals already.
And then I typically will eat dinner, depends, seven or eight PM.
And I tend to put more carbohydrates in the evening.
I know some people gasped at that.
But come through.
I'm not saying to you guys.
But if you do a workout of the sort that I do in the morning, it sets typically to failure.
I'm training not real quick.
But you know, you're pleading that glycogen.
I'm fine to have a plate of pasta.
And I'd have a little bit less protein in the evening because I find it very hard to get
good sleep in an in a low carb state.
See, I will.
If I want to sleep, or let's say, maybe something happened where I didn't have a hard
workout during the day.
And I know I'm going to have a hard time for almost a week.
I'm like a little bit of that rice going in the other.
This is my last time spaghetti going up in there because I'm going that carb.
Oh, yeah.
Damn, you know, coma.
Yeah.
Well, you know, I'll do that.
But we're not talking enormous volumes.
Oh, I am.
So some rice or some pasta, some risotto or something.
I'm fortunate that my girlfriend's a really good cook.
So she'll say, what do you want?
And then I'll tell her and she'll cook it.
She was a professional chef for a long time.
Oh, she's an average.
And she's fast.
So basically, she says, what do you want to eat today in that kind of thing?
And so that's what I get.
And I'm very lucky in that way.
The one thing that I make sure to do is we know what we can edit that out.
You don't want to give up that kind of leverage in this scenario.
We can edit it out.
I'm really big on that evening meal being mostly carbohydrates.
Also vegetables that happen to really like vegetables and less protein.
So I might have a small piece of fish or some broth, a soup or something like that.
And keep in mind that I'm not usually eating anything until 11 o'clock the next day.
And I'm likely going to train again in the morning or run again in the morning.
And so I want my glycogen top-dough.
I'm not looking to walk around at 6% body fat or anything like that.
I keep a relatively low body fat percentage and have for a long time.
I feel good where I'm at.
EBS inflows depending on the season.
But I have zero appetite for sugar.
And that's a recent thing.
A few years ago, I just stopped having the half glass of wine just because everyone else
was doing it.
I stopped having dessert just because.
And I noticed that I didn't like it.
And I just didn't make me feel good.
And I'd much rather consume calories from clean sources like rice and meat and fish and vegetables.
It's kind of thing.
I do eat some fruit.
I'm not huge on dairy.
But I'll have a little bit of really good cheese, really good Parmesan cheese or really
good fermented cheese.
One thing that's very clear from the scientific literature.
This is the work of Justin Sonnenberg and Chris Gardner at Stanford that fermented foods,
low sugar fermented foods, sour crowd, kimchi, low sugar kombucha, Greek yogurt, unsweetened
Greek yogurt.
Enhanced the gut microbiome, these trillions of gut bacteria, that actually make the sort
of neurotransmitters that cross into the blood-bring barrier and create the substrate for things
like dopamine and up in effort, and, et cetera.
And can reduce inflammation markers.
They call this the inflamatoma.
It's like looking at your genome.
They looked at inflammatory markers in people that consumed four servings, which is not
a lot, four two-ounce servings of low sugar fermented foods per day.
They're to increasing their fiber.
Now, I'm not disparaging a fiber, but what they found was that people who ate a lot of fiber
either increased inflammatory markers, maintained or decreased.
It was all over the place.
Mainly the effect of being a lot of fibers.
You increased the number of enzymes that you make that digest fiber.
The people who ate a lot of fermented food, low sugar fermented foods across the board
reduced these inflammatory markers.
I feel better when I'm eating some kimchi, sour crowd, et cetera.
We started making our own, meaning she makes it.
I don't make it.
To do that, we went to Tim Ferriss's four-hour body book.
There's a rest of our chef.
Excuse me.
He describes in there a way that you can cut up cabbage and ferment it with some salt water.
You have to do this properly because you can get some harmful bacteria, but if you do
it covered with a cloth, you put in the dark, you take it out, you skim off the bad stuff.
It's kind of fun.
The reason for doing this is that a lot of live culture fermented foods can get pretty
expensive if you have an appetite like mine.
I love to eat and I'll just eat it by the bowl for.
The pretty senior dropping $10 here, if you're down in kombucha left and right, you're drinking
some of the most expensive food, it's more expensive than petroleum.
We have big vats of kimchi and this kind of thing, and I like hot sauces, so she's figured
out how to make fermented hot sauces.
You can do all this stuff easily.
I'm always eating fermented sauces and foods throughout the day.
She's okay, although I think if you don't do it right, it can be pretty foul to be around
the smell is pretty intense.
Occasionally, I'll have a slice of cobblers, but that's like once or twice a year.
I just don't have an appetite for it.
I really look forward to the post-training meal, a big bowl of oatmeal, or yes, occasionally
if I'm training at a gym someplace.
I'll be like, how do I get some glycogen back in my system?
It's two bananas and a few bagels.
Yeah, I've done it before.
There's no cast you out.
Well, on the internet, you're like, oh my goodness, I don't know why this topic of nutrition
it has people so up in arms.
I'm not trying to cure carnivore thing.
I understand you can re-pack glycogen with gluconeogenesis protein converted to other fuels.
I've not tried the plant-based thing because I would just be thinking about cows all day.
I like the animal, but I would just be craving meat.
My dad's Argentine after all.
I don't tend to do cheat days anymore, that kind of thing.
I shed that in my early 40s.
But yeah, that's pretty basic.
There's caffeine in the early part of the day.
Hydration is really key.
I mean, I think for the brain and for the body, hydration's key.
And then we're not talking so much about supplements, but if there were one supplement that's
really been shown to be useful for physical performance, but also where most of the data
point to is for brain fuel is creatine.
The for brain system depends on a phosphocreatine type fuel in addition to glucose.
So I do five grams of creatine monohydrate a day.
I will do the alpha GPC in an energy drink or before training.
A lot of people forget that energy is not just caloric.
There's neural energy, dopamine, or up in effort.
We talked about the meat.
If you meet is rich with tyrosine.
tyrosine is in amino acid, red meat especially, that's the precursor to dopamine.
Carbohydrates and white meat turkey are rich in the amino acid, triptophan, which is the precursor
to serotonin.
And so as I say this, it probably all makes sense that you can generate states of alertness
and states of sleepiness depending on what you eat.
I will say, however, if you in the enormous volume of anything, you will direct more blood
to your gut relative to your brain.
So if you have five ribbi steaks or two ribbi steaks depending on how big they are,
yes, you will have a lot of tyrosine in your system.
You also have a lot of blood in your gut and you'll be tired and you want to go to sleep.
So you can't beat the system completely.
But yeah, that's pretty much how I eat.
And I maintain some flexibility.
I mean, we're in San Diego right now.
I miss tacos.
I'm talking to Tuesday and San Diego is a special experience.
Occasionally, I'll have a white-to-kill of margarito, which I love.
Everyone's like, I'm not a super extreme guy on this stuff.
But I would love to be pure carnivore or pure vegan.
Sorry, Paul Saladino.
He's a friend and I have some vegan friends like Rich Roll.
I just don't want to live that way.
And I'm probably going to get assaulted for saying this.
But one group will come after me with celery sticks and the other group will come after
me with raw meat.
But all I can say is, you do you and I love those guys.
I'll keep going the way I'm going and we'll see how it goes.
I like the fact that you said you have vegan friends.
You mentioned sugar, the habit of sugar, and you don't take much sugar anymore.
And you know, what are the podcasts that you've done is about habits, making habits, breaking
habits, give us some high level, habit forming and habit breaking neurological strategies
we can utilize.
Well, we've already talked about how dopamine puts you into an action state and the
serotonin system tends to bias you toward a more sedative state or calm state.
Maybe even a more creative state, which is associated with calm states.
If you were trying to build habits and you look to the neuroscience of habit building,
you would be wise to put certain habits at the early part of the day and certain habits
at the later part of the day.
I call phase one of the day from zero to nine hours after waking.
That period of the day assuming that you're getting that sunlight exposure and a little
bit of movement.
But even if you're just getting some sunlight exposure, it's going to be associated with
high up and effort and high dopamine, slightly higher cortisol.
Certain habits, we could call linear habits.
It's the, these are things that you know how to do and you just need to do them.
Other habits and so those sorts of habits would go well in that zero to nine hours
period that I call phase one, zero to nine hours after waking phase one.
Then phase two and these aren't absolute phases, but go from about 10 hours till about
16 or 17 hours after waking.
We tend to be a little bit sleepier.
We tend to be a little bit calmer, at least not necessarily sleepy.
I'm going to be a little bit calmer.
It's clear that other habits that have to do with what we call nonlinear brain operations,
things like creative writing, brainstorming with a group, brainstorming with yourself,
and a litic work that is where there is no clear right answer.
It's not plug and shug.
It's more exploratory.
Go best in the second phase, phase two.
I've been with seeing about rolling jiu-jitsu earlier.
I have a, I can't even call it rolling jiu-jitsu.
We've only done it once, but clearly there's a lot of moment to moment creativity and sorting
things out.
Whereas weightlifting, it sets and reps.
You're trying to complete a certain amount of sets and reps.
You're trying to cover a certain amount of distance running.
Linear versus nonlinear.
Then of course there's the 17 to 24 hours, which is phase three.
During that time, you want to be engaging one set of habits, which is sleep.
Roughly, it could be 16 to 24 hours, et cetera.
Try and put the habits you're trying to form into the times of day in which those will
actually be easiest.
This sort of violates the earlier rule of trying to access limbic friction.
If there's something that you're really trying to adopt more exercise and that exercise
is running a certain distance in a certain amount of time, put that in the early part
of the day.
If you're trying to do creative work, doing the second part of the day, if you are trying
to develop a new skill that's exploratory, second part of the day, if you're trying to
learn a skill that has defined steps already, it's linear early part of the day, people
will just find that it's simpler to do it in that fashion.
The other thing is that if you look at the signs of goal setting, there are clear data
that there's a woman at New York University, Emily Balkettis, or Balsettis, I think,
is the correct pronunciation.
She's described that while we like to think about envisioning success as the best way
to set goals and develop new habits, it turns out the research shows that it's far more
effective to imagine the catastrophic effects of failure.
It's the darkness none of us want to embrace, but fear is the more powerful motivator.
Provided you can still think clearly, you don't want to put yourself into a state of panic.
goal setting of if I don't do this every day, I'm looking at diabetes and early death,
is going to be a much more powerful motivator than imagining you're going, oh, I'm going
to be 10 pounds lighter and I can bench press 15% more by Christmas this time of year.
It's great to have goals, it's also great to have motivators that are based on real world
fear.
Fear.
That's what the data say.
I was having a conversation with the bodymind that's at a big medical company and we were,
I was saying, oh, you know, when my, when my, I was kind of, I was kind of professing guilt
because when my kids were younger, you know, I did say, oh, you know, can we get some ice
cream and I took sure you want some type two diabetes, go with it, but this dude, no kidding
would have like needles and hat like stick the kids so that they could get used to get
it.
Oh, you, you want to have some ice cream cool.
Go get the needle.
We're going to, we're going to stick your fingers so that when you have type two diabetes,
you have to do an insulin draw.
Oh, I get this.
I was like, I was like, man, I'm just doing one up to me.
I don't get one up that often.
I'm going to come to be in stupid, but it's even a pull it off.
That's intense.
The dive guy can't comment on parenting.
We should also recall the dopamine reward system.
The best way to reward yourself for a job well done is random intermittent reward.
We've always talked up until now or we've been talking up until now that, you know,
effort reward is the cycle.
That cycle, effort reward, but if you want to keep remember dopamine, non-infinite, but
replenishable, how about not spend it at all?
How about use what the casinos use in order to keep yourself into a state of motivation?
So if you are checking off the boxes, I did this behavior, this new habit, that new habit,
that new habit, that new upgrade, do that.
But don't celebrate every win.
Celebrate random intermittent wins.
Celebrate, so how do you do that if you're in control of it?
Well, don't reward yourself with external rewards very often.
Make the training its own reward.
If it's I'm going to train and then I'm going to have the pancake breakfast.
Great.
Do it every once in a while, but don't do it every Sunday, don't do it every workout.
It's not so much about the frequency as much as it is, how the pattern, what we call
the schedule of reward.
You can see this in sports teams and some of the challenges over the years of everyone
gets a trophy.
I mean, nothing is more undermining to the dopamine system than that idea.
I mean, I don't know what happened with that, but I don't want to punish anybody because
I also don't know who it was, but that group or person who made that decision that everyone
gets a trophy clearly did not reap the literature about how the neuroscience of reward
and the psychology of reward works.
You actually diminish the role of rewards in every way and you take away the ability
to access the reward system in the future.
You're creating, you're not creating soft versions of people.
You're actually creating people, they're just like the rat with no dopamine.
It's a really sad state.
We have a name for that in humans.
It's called Parkinson's.
You deplete the dopamine system.
People get shaky.
They can't move.
That's in the motor system, but people with Parkinson's also experience extreme lack of motivation
and depression because of lack of dopamine.
That's the characteristic feature of Parkinson's, as lack of dopamine neurons.
You want to, everyone's in a while, reward yourself for reaching a goal.
One way to do this and that we've structured on the podcast, but I can just describe really
easily, is set three or four habits that you want to create for yourself in a list of six.
So find six habits and decide every day you're going to do four.
But never compensate day to day.
There's reasons for doing this.
Let's say one day it's trained if you're not really run, if you're not already doing that.
Right, if you're not already doing that, you can list these off.
Grattitude practice, NSTR, and then let's just come up with one.
I don't know, eat a vegetable or just making these up.
So you're going to list those out on your calendar.
And then every day you're going to do it least four, but as many as five.
But if one day you only get one, you don't carry over and do 10 the next day.
If you understand the dopamine system, you'll understand why.
Because what you're trying to do is you're trying to train up a circuitry for giving
yourself random intermittent reward for performing these habits on a regular basis.
So people will go do these heroic workouts or they'll do a ton of stuff and then reward
themselves and they've just undermined the whole process of being able to do that consistently.
If that wasn't clear, it's a little complicated.
But the way that reward schedules work is you're trying to teach the circuitry to work
regularly be rewarded only every once in a while and at random.
So if you were technically going to do this, I would have to make a bucket with a bunch
of ping pong balls in it and most of the ping pong balls didn't have anything on them.
But then some of the ping pong balls had chocolate chip cookie perfect.
And then every time I get done with my workout, I'm like, hey, I did the workout.
I did a good job.
I'm going to grab a ping pong ball from the bucket.
Nothing.
Next day.
Chocolate chip cookie.
That's what I would have to technically do.
But I had to do the workout to pull one of these things out of the bucket.
Perfect.
And how many rewards to put in that bucket versus how many blank ping pong balls, you
could say maybe one third of them should have a reward.
But remember, it's random.
And so that exactly describes the way we would do an experiment on an animal or human
in our laboratory.
And then with humans, we do it in a very particular way.
We actually pay them real money.
We have people do hard work for money.
Very amounts of money.
Often.
And you can record from the brain.
You can record from dopamine centers or other centers.
What happens is people start trying to create the most rational strategy.
You get these maniacs that will just try and get as many reps as possible.
This is not a discussion about learning and plasticity.
You may get into that. But it's very clear that errors or the anticipation of a reward
and then no reward, while it leads to disappointment, it also increases attention and the
ability to focus on the next trial.
Think about this.
What do you guys call it behind glass?
You're shooting.
Writing.
You're missing.
Every time you miss, the next trial is the one you're paying the most attention to.
When you hit, you think, oh, the next one I'm good.
No, the next one.
Why would you be good?
Why would you just succeed it?
Why would your nervous system pay attention to what happens next?
When you succeed, your nervous system goes, oh, that happened that way and it's a little
relaxation.
It's a little relaxation.
So errors we know, queue up the forebrain.
It increases activity in the prefrontal cortex.
You're only done this.
I don't get behind glass, but I've thrown darts in a bar.
You're up there.
There are people watching and you're used to do this in graduate school.
This is a little bar in Davis and we throw darts and you miss.
You're really, it's almost that little anger and the next one you're completely dialed in.
But then you're like bulls eye, bulls eye, off the, off the, ah.
And when you make it the next one, you're not paying as careful attention to your motor
patterns.
So you might get lucky, but you're not learning.
So errors are key to learning and the proper ratio of errors to successful trials for
optimal learning is very clear from machine learning and from human learning is the 85
15 rule.
The how difficult to make a task should be 85% of the time you're performing it correctly,
15% of the time you're performing it incorrectly.
Or or less, plus or minus 2%.
If you want to optimize learning 85% you get it 15% you miss.
Yeah, that's about the right level of difficulty for motor skill learning, cognitive learning,
et cetera.
Any more than that is you're putting too much of a demand on the attentional systems.
Any less you're putting too little demand on the attentional systems.
That's what the machine learning shows in humans.
That's what the machine learning algorithm is based on human learning.
That's what the animal data show.
Of course, there'll be some variation on this, but if people are saying, oh, I want
to teach these kids Spanish, why I want to teach people how to shoot.
Well, make it difficult enough so that there are about 15% error rate.
Or GJ2, I guess.
Well, GJ2, unfortunately, we start GJ2.
You're getting 100% error rate because you get tapped out all the time.
That's why it takes a lot of effort to get over the hump in the beginning.
Look, we've been going for a while.
I do want to, you've touched on this a little bit, but before we wrap and I can already tell
if you're okay with it, hopefully we can do some more podcasts in the future.
I'd love to have you on my podcast.
I'd love to.
Yeah, sit down and chat with you guys and need time.
Let's do it.
Let's get people ready for bed.
Ready for sleep.
You've already talked about what we're doing, what our temperature's doing, how
we get ready for bed at the end of the day.
After our three bouts of work, I've always called them a day.
Dude, that's legit.
I'm in, you know, you've got to have that.
It's a mindset thing, right?
You're like, okay, I need to get rid of getting a game.
Forward center of mass.
Yeah, so.
If you sit down and try, if you sit down to any cognitive task and or physical task and
pray for focus, can we be praying along to?
It just doesn't work that way.
The brain needs, you need to recruit the attentionals.
We're doing this.
Yeah.
We really need to recruit the attentionals systems.
And I get concerned about people trying to leverage too many tools, even though
I talk about a lot of tools.
At some point, you've got the work that you're there, caffeinated, you're hydrated as
you would say, go, shut up and go.
When I write books, we're done written a couple.
I write a thousand words a day.
It takes about an hour.
And I rarely will write more than that.
I almost never miss once I'm in the zone and I got a book.
I won't miss, but that's it.
I like the attitude of going in of, hey, this is about like I'm about to go get it on.
And I need to just bring the heat for an hour.
And I like that.
That's a good idea.
Yeah, I learned it in graduate school.
Cutting, there's this thing called a microtone where you take a brain.
It's frozen.
You slice it off like a deli slice or one little piece at a time.
And is this a Hannibal Lecter scenario?
Yeah, well, I have a lot of stories from the lab that since you guys are not afraid
of letting guts, you know, we can get into that.
But you're putting these little thin slices of tissue into these little wells of liquid.
And it's very delicate work.
And some of these specimens were very valuable either because they came from human beings
that had interesting experiences like the loss of one eye or something or because
the tissue had been created through a number of experiments that lasted months, if not
years.
So it's really important stuff.
And then what was taught to me by one of the perhaps the greatest neurophthalmologists
at UCSF Jonathan Horne, he said, the moment that microtone blade hits that tissue, a
nuclear bomb could go off in the building.
And you're not going to increase the speed of the pull because the slower you can pull
at the better of the quality of the tissue, but you can't stop.
And so I learned to just lay down through these brains.
And some people will put ice on it and go have lunch come back and it never quite cuts
right when you come back to it.
So how long would it take to a slice?
For a small mal-sprayin would take maybe an hour, you can get why did we not make a machine
that would do it?
The machines can't adjust the temperature and speed actually the way you adjust the
temperature.
Kids don't do this.
You're fingering, you put it on there and get it.
There's just a texture of like very cold butter that's just right.
It's a feel thing.
The machine will crack the tissue.
It doesn't know when it's screwing up.
So I've cut through my Kakamunki brains that took me somewhere between seven and eight
hours.
And it's a single pole.
As a sit well, when you're doing a pole and then repeating and then poking God or God.
Done that and I've done a whole human brain mediathe, done a block of a human frontal
cortex of all things and human retina where I think the longest have gone is something
like 11 hours of cutting.
And in that case, just to be clear about how this works, you've got a little bit of food
next to you, you've got your portable bathroom next to you.
Sometimes you have to urinate during these things, you handle it.
You typically do this alone in a room.
And you finish it off that thing and you get those things into tissue well.
And there's almost nothing is satisfying.
There are things more satisfying.
How's that going?
It's nice.
About anywhere from 20 to 40 microns.
So a millimeter is divided into 1,000 microns.
So credit cards 200 approximately 200 microns thick.
So very, very thin.
You can see through it.
It's translucent.
And it's so much fun.
And then you stain them and you put them under microscopes.
And I'm my career was built on this work too.
So you're also thinking about the, you're collecting the crops of your farm.
So to speak.
It's so pleasurable.
It really is.
You wouldn't get me third person personality, what were you calling it?
Where you wouldn't get any detachment when you're doing that kind of getting the zone?
I didn't really listen to audio books back then.
I would listen to a lot of rants.
Listen to a lot of Glenn Gould as a classical pianist.
If ever you need to do work and you want to listen to classical music and you're not
really into classical music, Glenn Gould is just perfect for that background brain state.
And just an amazing piano player.
So I would do that.
And so I guess the point is that we can train ourselves to focus and it feels so good.
It reminds me of my bulldog chewing on something.
And you know, I'm going to, I wasn't going to reveal this.
When I got him, I got him from a guy named Elvis.
So I named him to Costello.
But there was a moment because this was about the zone.
I thought about naming him, Jocco.
Because you guys both have big necks.
So the anyway, it's, I got him earlier.
But there was always this question.
Do we keep Costello as his name?
Because I didn't name him as someone who said it.
And I was like, maybe we keep Costello.
Anyway, there was a debate in our household at one point.
Costello won out.
Sorry.
Good.
But hey, someone out there has named their dog Jocco.
And hopefully it's because they have a thick neck.
There's quite a few dogs out there named Jocco.
There's a couple kids out there named Jocco.
There's some police dogs out there named Jocco.
Are there Jocco tattoos?
Yes.
There are some Jocco tattoos out there in the world.
Yeah, if you talk about, people get good for a tattoo.
People get this one.
It was free to them for a tattoo.
It was a pretty cool.
Yeah.
So some of that stuff going on.
Anyway, did it, has anyone gotten any, you know, who grew them in lab?
Tats yet?
Not that I'm aware of.
But I will say this, if anyone gets a tattoo of Lex Friedman's face, I'll be happy to have
a one hour zoom with you to discuss any topic in the world side and see you on.
So if anyone wants to get a neck tattoo of Lex Friedman's face, then we'll do it two hours
zoom.
I was on Lex's podcast.
Please don't put it.
He's tough.
I was on Lex's podcast.
And it was an interesting interaction we'll say.
And he's an awesome guy.
It was just like, I don't know.
It was a little strange.
But and somebody actually nailed it.
They said, this is like the Terminator from the second Terminator movie, interviewing the
Terminator from the first Terminator movie.
Because he was asking me to go questions and I was giving him like one word answers
for whatever.
It took a while to get like a flowed garden.
You know, it's kind of flooded.
He's a good friend of mine.
I, yeah.
So I know, I want to do it again.
I want to, I want to, I got to do his podcast again where we, where we have a little bit
of a, because now I kind of know him.
And we've had some other, we actually, the last time I talked him on the phone, we were actually
just laughing our asses off about a couple of things.
That was one of the things I told him, hey, I read this comment about where do you, where
the interviewer be, and he was just laughing because he was so accurate.
It was got a funny.
Maybe he actually rolled you, Jitsu.
Yeah, yeah.
You can just settle it out.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Just what, I don't think there was any friction, but maybe you guys just have you rolled
you, Jitsu.
No, no, there wasn't any friction.
It was just, I think, you know, he, he started off with some question, like, are you
afraid of death?
I'm like, no.
And he got away from there.
I was like, okay, you know, if you, he's like, you want to expand on that.
I'm like, I am not afraid of death.
Whatever it was, but it was funny.
It sounded funny afterwards when I listened to it.
I was like, man, why, I don't know what happened.
I listened to that podcast.
I really enjoyed it.
Yeah, anyway, like I said, and I, I really like Lex and I really like his podcast.
And yeah, and the other funny thing is we were kind of chilling.
Like we met, was in LA, we're talking, you know, we're just talking and we sit down.
And that was another thing.
It kind of, like we're just talking like whatever.
And then all of a sudden he's like, and he doesn't, he goes to making eye contact with
me.
And he goes, are you afraid of death?
Like just, we're talking about whatever, and he goes, are you afraid of death?
And I was like, no.
And then I guess that was the start of the podcast.
That goes getting a kick out of the way.
Straight to the deep end.
So true.
That's right.
So I, Lex, you guys should do it again.
You guys have to.
Who knows?
Maybe.
I'm sure I'll get down to Austin at some point and hook it up.
Talk to, talk to Lex again.
And hopefully I can be, this is by the way, this is just like, because I was just, I don't
know, I don't know what, what I messed up.
But I'll do better.
I'll do better next time.
I won't be, I won't be like a Terminator robot.
I guess I'll try not to be.
Maybe what your response about the death question will be the same.
Yeah, my response about the death question will be the same, you know, and are you
afraid of death?
No.
We're talking about, definitely, not exactly what they're there.
Yeah.
So back to sleep.
To win this.
To win this initial podcast up.
What do we, how we get ready for sleep?
OK.
View some sunlight in the afternoon before the sun goes down.
Why?
It adjusts your retinal sensitivity in a way that allows you to get, to view a little bit more
artificial light at night without disrupting your melatonin.
Beautiful study, published in scientific reports shows this.
It adjusts that sensitivity so that bright light from screens isn't going to really mess
you up quite as much.
I call it your Netflix and Osculation.
However, dim the lights in the evening, especially overhead lights.
These neurons in the eye that we were talking about before that set the circadian rhythm
and generate states of alertness, they're more or less in the lower half of your eye
and they view the upper visual field, make sense.
They're there to extract sunlight.
So if you're going to light your environment, which you should, obviously, you need to move
about, put lights, you know, use lamps or table lamps or if you want to get really
extreme stuff near the floor.
If you're really into this, you could get red bulbs and because red shifted light is
actually going to be less disruptive to your circadian rhythms.
In fact, there's a nice study looking at for shift workers, red light isn't going to increase
cortisol late in the day.
And shift work is something, obviously, thank you shift workers.
We realize that much of what we talked about, you can't access because you're doing the
important work at night that all of us depend on.
I have a whole episode on shift work that people can get tools for that, the long discussion.
So, dim the lights, set them low in the room, red lights if you're really extreme about
it, put on blue blockers if you do that sort of thing, but or just dim the lights.
Cool the environment.
In general, it's not good to fall asleep within two hours of eating a big meal, but
you'd be, if you can fall asleep, it's always good to get sleep.
So, you know, that some people are really neurotic about this, like I won't eat within
two hours of bedtime fine, but if you get home from work two hours late because of traffic
or you're going to not eat and then not sleep, I mean, just be a human.
Eat dinner and then try and give yourself a little bit of time before you go to sleep.
So, in all seriousness, I would hate to see people obsess too much.
Hydrate, but of course, don't drink a ton of fluid before going to sleep because there's
a direct circuit from the bladder to the brainstem.
This is why you wake up in the middle of the night because you have to go to the bathroom.
So, don't over-hydrate at night.
And if you do a hot bath or a sauna or something like that, obviously hydrate, but remember
that cool off after that will help drop your body temperature even further.
Then in terms of your sleep environment, there's a really nice paper that just came out
and proceeds to the National Academy of Sciences showing that people that sleep in a room
where there are ambient lights, there's lights on, even if they're pretty dim, some
of that light actually gets through the eyelids and disrupts metabolism and morning glucose
management and insulin secretion.
So try and keep your sleeping environment as dark as possible.
Don't obsess about one little light or something, but you've ever been the hotel with
a bright blue light, it's really annoying.
The one bright light in the corner.
Here's the other thing.
Some people like me have really thin eyelids, don't ask me why.
Some people have thick eyelids, so some people can see light through their eyelids more
than others.
Yeah, so where did I mask if you want to, but keep it dark.
There are a bunch of different things.
If you are the one really important thing that most people are not aware of is that work
from Chuck Sice's lab at Harvard Medical School has shown, we are Harvard, where's that?
Is this a little school in Boston?
They have a couple campuses and they have good people.
Some good people came out of there.
Not an amazing place.
It's a tough place.
People are the training there.
There's a lot of, it's rigorous at many places, but Harvard's reputation of, they really
like the old school academic grind.
They do modern science, but they really like to add friction.
Do you go out there, ever?
Yeah, we got a lot of friends at Harvard Medical School and the undergrad campus and I've
good relationship to all of them.
New York, it's neuroscience.
We call it the New York neuroscience mafia.
They all have tickets to the opera.
They all are very cultured and they do neuroscience.
Boston, they just live academics.
The town of Boston is amazing.
Students everywhere, everywhere in Boston, someone is pursuing something.
The punk rock bands in Boston work harder than anywhere else.
It's a, they like friction.
They're built on friction.
Boston, yeah.
Bay Area and Stanford, especially, it's about, because of the technology sector, it's
about the future.
We care about the lineage of the past, of course, and our no-bells and all that stuff, but
it's really about what's next.
The students want to start companies.
They want to change the entire world.
Other places too, but Stanford, there's this idea of the future is where it's at.
The past, you know, a nondegraduate one said to me, you know, I said, oh yeah, this guy
downstairs for me discovered the structure of RNA and his dad discovered basically RNA.
And he says, no-bell prize and like does he have an app?
And it's like, you know, I mean, that work is transformative in many ways, but it's just
well, how is it impacting the real world?
That's one reason I like really like being at Stanford.
It's about real world impact now.
But they're Harvard's great.
So basically you want to Chuck's Iser's Lab at Harvard Medical School showed that about
an hour before your natural bedtime, you're going to be very alert for about an hour.
There are evolutionary theories about why this would be that you're going to tamp down
all your village resources.
You're going to make sure you're safe.
That's security.
That's not that.
Yeah, right?
You get ready for bed at night.
So go make sure that the external perimeter is secured.
Make sure that locks are locked.
Make sure the alarm systems are on.
Make sure the dog is rabbit and ready to eat people.
Make sure your Maggie seems to have loaded.
And you're going to go.
Booby traps are set.
Yeah, we are vulnerable and sleep as the vampire shift of ops knows all too well.
Right?
And it hit them while they're sleeping.
So you want to respect that and not worry about it.
A lot of people freak out why am I wide awake.
It will pass.
And I wish more people knew about this because it's everyone experiences this.
And then the other thing is light inhibits melatonin and melatonin is the molecule of sleepiness.
So viewing bright light will cross your melatonin.
That's why you want to dim the lights in the evening.
And if you wake up in the middle of the night and you need to go use the bathroom,
that's perfectly normal.
But don't flip on lights that are super bright.
Use a night light.
Don't use bright overhead lights.
Don't go into a super bright environment.
You will suppress your melatonin.
Now a lot of people go to bed around 11 or 12 and wake up around 2 or 3 and can't fall
back asleep.
And one more prominent theory in the sleep science community now is that those people should
have gone to bed at 8.30 or 9.00 PM and that their melatonin is running out basically.
So play with your bedtime.
I, for instance, have learned, we're talking about this before we started that a going
to bed for me at 10 PM.
I'm up at 4.
Feeling great.
If I go to bed at 11 PM or midnight, I can sleep till 7 or 8 and never feel quite right
and part of that because I'm waking up 2 or 3 times in the middle of the night.
So you have to figure out where your optimal to sleep time is and that will change across
the lifespan.
Young kids sometimes want to stay up later and sleep in later and need more sleep.
And as we get older, supposedly we need less sleep when we come early risers.
People obsess a little too much about this morning person, late person thing.
You got to figure out when your bed is too bed time is.
If you wake up in the middle of the night and you want to go back to sleep and you cannot,
I recommend listening to that non-sleep deep rest script.
Do at least keep you from scrolling through social media or thinking about problems.
You're better off doing non-sleep deep rest than being wide awake when you want to be
asleep.
And you're better off being asleep when you want to be asleep obviously.
So one way you can get better at sleeping is to use an app like Revery, our EVE, ERI.
This is based on research at Stanford.
There's a sleep function in there.
They will allow you to try it for free.
There is a nominal cost after that and it's hypnosis for sleep.
And it's not someone hypnotizing you.
It teaches you to relax yourself into a state where the new drift off into sleep.
And it's the clinical data and the scientific papers on this are very strong.
So is it, if I put on the app right now, what's it going to do?
I'm ready to go to sleep, what's it doing?
Does it tell me you think about this?
Yeah.
Is it ASMR?
What's it going to do?
It's ASMR.
Like the scratch.
Yeah, I agree.
I have this weird obsession with ASMR.
So there's a state of mind we call hypnosis that involves being very alert but focused
on internal state.
And normally it's hard to be very alert with your eyes closed and some people can access
this state better than others.
And in this state you are very suggestible and some people can be more readily hypnotized
than others.
There's a colleague of mine at Stanford David Spiegel and his father of MDs, his dad's
dead now, but they developed this field of hypnosis for psychiatry and for reprogramming
the mind and pain management, trauma, but also sleep, et cetera.
There's a simple test that we can do and anyone can do.
If you can look up, you can do this with Rogan didn't you?
Yeah, if you can maintain upward gaze and close your eyes, you are highly hypnotizable.
If you have a hard time maintaining upward gaze with your eyelids closed, you are less
hip and sizeable.
It's a wonderful scale.
Now keep in mind if this sounds wacky, how do they evaluate concussion based on the
size of the pupils relative to one another by shining light in one or the other eye.
So the eyes as two pieces of brain are the neurologists in this case, this psychiatrist,
primary tools to assess the brain without putting you into a brain scanner.
So it sounds wacky because it's like look up and then close your eyes.
We can do it with you.
If you look up and then keeping upward gaze slowly close your eyes.
Yep, looks like you can do it.
Yep, see how you sell the whites of his eyes?
That's what he said.
It means he's highly hypnotized.
Now why?
I'm going to make sense to me.
You can try revery and that will help you fall back asleep that sort of thing.
If you wake up in the middle then the worst thing you could do would be to look at any bright
light or screen light.
That would be a terrible idea because you're going to squash your melatonin and you're
going to start bringing in new sensory stimuli.
I mean, just think about how unusual that is.
Normally, you wouldn't bring in new sensory information in the middle of the night.
Now you're accessing information from Nova Scotia, Africa and Texas all at once and
you're watching the Lex Friedman body.
So those are the things around sleep that are really useful.
Then of course there are some supplements that if you're doing all the other things correctly
and you're still not sleeping well, the supplements that a lot of people benefit from are
magnesium 3 and 8, THR, EO and ATE or magnesium biskycinate.
Those forms of magnesium help speed the transition into sleep in the depth of sleep.
They are interchangeable with one another, biskycinate or 3 and 8 seem to be equally effective.
Some people also benefit from taking something called Apagene and API, GENI and it's a derivative
of chemo mile.
50 milligrams of Apagene will help you a lot of people turn off their thinking.
It's non-addictive.
It has high safety margins.
Obviously, talk to your doctor if that's important to you.
These things are readily available.
I don't have a relationship to Apagene and company Swanson makes it.
I have no relationship to Swanson.
Apagene 3 and 8 cost various tremendously where you look, I've seen it very expensive and
I've seen it less expensive.
I can't tell a difference between the different sources.
My wish is that the expensive companies will bring the price down, but I've noticed a ratcheting
up.
Some people will take, oh, and it's 144 milligrams of magnesium for whatever reason they
always charted out as 144.
About 5% of people will get some gastric distress from Mag 3 and 8.
It is distinct from magnesium malay toward magnesium citrate.
Magnesium citrate is a terrific laxative.
Magnesium malay seems to be better for muscle soreness and on and on.
There are these magnesium jockeys out there that get really nuanced about this, but Mag 3
and 8 are business class and it will help.
Then there's the Indian THEA and I and I and which many people take also before sleep
100 to 200 milligrams or so, it will give you more vivid dreams than you would otherwise.
So if you're a sleepwalker, you have night terrors, don't take it, but you can take that.
The Indian is now showing up in energy drinks and in coffee because it's a slight pushes
back on the systems that cause stress it reduces the jitters.
You can drink a lot more coffee if you're also taking the Indian, but everything I just
described would be taken 30 to 60 minutes before bed.
Then if you want to bring out the really heavy guns, which I haven't talked about before
in a podcast, but there's some interesting data and I've been looking at and researching
in osutall 900 milligrams of inosutall, wow, that's a sedative.
I mean, if there ever was any a sedative, it also is what's to do with a nosutall.
Inosutall is hitting these GABA urgent transmitters systems in the rug?
No, it's a supplement that it's in the vitamin pathway that will reduce anxiety.
900 milligrams of myotinosutall is the form that you want to seek out if you're going
to try this.
I did it for a while. I slept very, very well. I replaced the other stack with inosutall.
Again, no relationship to anosutall company.
The problem was I felt so mellow in the morning.
I didn't like it for me.
And why are podcasts for talk or if he doesn't do well with mag 3 and 8 disrupts
systems?
So he took inosutall and he called me in the next day. He's like, what is that stuff?
I slept 10 hours.
So different sensitivities, but inosutall seems to work well for people that are on a low
carbohydrate diet and have a hard time getting into sleep.
So I think we can expect the anosutall market is going to start to pick up some momentum
soon because it really does work quite well.
But better than ambient or prescription drugs, always go behaviors first, then supplements
if you need them and then the prescription stuff.
If that's your thing and you have a doctor that's going to help you with that.
But my goal has always been to rely on as few prescriptions of anything as possible by doing
the right behaviors avoiding them wrong behaviors and diet and supplements.
When you are a kid, you're going to that therapist and they maybe thought you were a little
jacked up.
Psychologically, did they put you on anything back then?
You open them so glad they did not.
Do you think the tendency now is that they put people on stuff a lot quicker?
That's the lead is right?
Absolutely.
And there are cases where this is vitally important.
But I am so grateful that I went through all that before the massive SSRI phase.
Before I don't think I had ADHD.
If anything I have a bit more of an OCD as you can probably tell, I get into a pretty narrow
tranche and I will just keep going until people say stop.
But I always have been that way.
But when I was a little kid, I a little bit of a grunting tick.
And my family physician was smart enough to know, just wait, it will pass.
Those four brain circuits of suppression are starting to develop.
Nowadays they put a kid on Tourette's medication.
So I am very wary of, I mean, you are blitzing these neurochemical systems.
And again, there are cases where people really need it.
Suicide or depression, please get on an antidepressant and get talk therapy.
Severe ADHD, please talk to a psychiatrist and a psychologist.
Get the diet right, too.
But I would just, my wish for humanity is that we, someone told me, I am cutting myself
off on purpose.
A psychiatrist colleague at Stanford told me that more than 75% of the psychoactive medication
that is consumed in the world is consumed in the United States.
It's us and we have no one to blame for this except ourselves.
And it's not like we have like the extremely rough environment that we're in America.
We created it in here.
Yeah.
What was up with the gun school suicide?
Because I did read a little bit about that when I was doing a little research on you.
And I just happened to happen to click into that.
What was going on with that?
What was it? 2017, they had four suicides.
They have a really high suicide rate.
What's going on with that?
Unclear.
But when I went to gun, it was academically rigorous.
Our football team was terrible, probably still as terrible.
But there were some good sports there.
So it wasn't a lack of physical activity.
Music and orchestra stuff is pretty big there.
So we know that now the kids are under significant pressure for academic performance.
There are train tracks not far from there.
And a good number of the suicides were by train.
It became a bit of a spreading phenomenon.
A little social contagion.
There is the idea that people were pushing their kids too hard in terms of academic performance,
who knows?
We can only speculate.
There was the idea that if you create an environment that's such high pressure and demand,
I think they've now forbidden the kids from meeting before school to do study sessions,
they were meeting at 6 am and studying.
And I don't think we can point our finger at any one thing or one collection of things.
But what a terrible situation.
I think it's hopefully resolved itself over time.
Someone from gun actually, someone related to gun, a parent, actually contacted me at one point
because they saw in their Wikipedia that I attended there and asked what my thoughts were on this.
And I said, listen, I'm not a psychiatrist or psychologist, but I went to that school.
I certainly had my challenges at that time.
Give them tools.
Please, tools matter, talking, the tele-friend or if you suspect absolutely call people,
but give people tools to understand when their mind is drifting off course.
And I think most of the tools that we've talked about today, certainly the behavioral ones,
they absolutely pertain to adults and the kids.
I think if our young people can learn how to self-regulate in both directions, ramp up and ramp down
as needed, overcome limbic friction, recognize limbic friction.
Understand the dopamine reward system.
I do hope I have this fantasy that it will help them know when they're on track and when
they're drifting off course.
One thing that I think is very cool about your story is, look, I've got four kids that
two of them in college now.
That pressure of this academic success to be in, it can be psycho.
And I think it's cool.
You're an example of someone that barely passed high school, took a little while to figure
out what you wanted to do was able to get on a path.
So maybe to all the kids out there, if you're under some hyper academic pressure right
now, man, you can get there.
You can get there.
This guy right here barely made it out of high school and now he's a tenured professor
at Stanford.
That's pretty awesome that you were able to do that.
And some of these kids, they don't get into whatever college they wanted to get into and
they think it's the end of the world.
And look, when you're young, of course, you break up with your girlfriend at the end of
the world.
You lose a football game at the end of the world.
There's all these things.
When your world is small, there's a lot of things that look like the end of the world.
But I think you're a great example of the fact that, look, you've got time to figure out
this stuff.
I'm the same way.
I was a rebellious young kid, didn't did shitty in high school.
Wasn't a great athlete.
OK, Joe, in the Navy, start going down the path and start to figure things out and the
same thing as you work hard.
So if you're a kid out there and you're feeling the pressures that the whole world's
going to fall apart because you missed some random hurdle about getting into college or
whatever you got on your SATs, which by the way, I don't take SATs anymore.
I don't think that's like, I heard they don't have physical education anymore either.
They do have physical education.
They still do have physical education.
I would say it's probably not as rigorous as it should be.
I'm sure you've seen those videos of what that's some school in the 50s or 60s that
they put this regimented physical education in.
And these kids, if you've seen those videos on talking about Echo Charles, yeah, the one
they're doing the drop to the push-ups.
Yeah, they're doing push-ups, but like, it's a troupe.
And these kids all look like freaking commandos.
It's pretty awesome.
And that's how it should be.
But yeah, I think you're a great example of, hey, you don't have to have a perfect path
to being very successful and doing what you truly want to do.
And there's another thing that kids get messed up on.
They think they should know what they want to do, what they want to do with their lives
when they're 14 years old.
And what do you want to be in your group?
I don't know.
And they feel bad because of that.
It's actually perfectly fine.
Take a little time to figure it out.
Now, I will say this.
And you already said this as well.
Go to school.
Try and get good grades.
Don't do freaking drugs.
Don't get in trouble.
Because then your options will be broader when you do get older.
But none of these things are the end of the world.
But actually, I'm talking about kids.
I'm not just talking about kids.
You can be 38 years old and figure out, oh, you know what?
I'm going to get my shit together right now.
I'm going to start moving in the right direction.
I mean, you talked about a bunch of skateboarders and I knew a bunch of hard
cork kids that didn't square themselves away until they were 37 years old.
And so we all have options out there.
And you're not going to nail it.
Man, no one nails a perfect game.
It doesn't happen.
No, it doesn't.
And, you know, if you can start early, great, but develop great work habits, but learn
how to toggle between work and rest.
And always say, find non-destructive ways to renew yourself.
So many of the forms of renewal, not just when kids are in college or in high school.
But also, I look at the corporate world.
And this is an issue that I actually had with academia for a long time.
It was like, how are we going to rest after a hard week of work and graduate school?
They're going to be a hour.
And you got people just like tying one on.
OK, sure.
I have nothing against people.
I have in a couple cocktails if that's their thing or beer or whatever.
But people just finding absolutely destructive ways to learn to rest.
They don't learn anything in that case.
So have non-destructive ways to recover yourself.
That could be a long jog or a hike on the weekends or go swimming or go watch a movie
or do something creative, draw.
I mean, spend time with people, whatever it is.
And I realize I'm coming across as kind of, you know, as it sounds a little corny.
But at the same time, you will go further and faster than everybody.
Yeah.
And what's important about what you just said, and this is some time back to something
you talked about earlier with these dopamine systems that we have.
It's a cycle.
And you can get yourself moving on the right cycle.
But that first step is hard.
Right?
That first, you're going to get a reward when you go for a run.
You're going to get a reward when you get done with squats.
You're going to get reward when you get done with you, too.
You're going to get a reward.
But that getting there, you have to impose that first part yourself.
You have to make it happen.
And that's, there's going to be, you know, your limbic system is going to be giving you
friction about how comfortable you are right now.
And maybe just another donut will be just as good.
And that's kind of an reward right now.
Don't listen to it.
Take action, go out and step into it.
And you're going to start yourself onto a cycle that is way more positive.
And it's going to have much better results in the long run than listening to your limbic
system, which is telling you to eat another donut, have another beer, get some immediate
dopamine from something that takes no effort whatsoever.
Yeah, we're sit back and just scroll to your death.
Oh, yeah.
Listen, probably a good place to wrap it up.
We're approaching five hours.
Anybody that's listening to this that wants to go deep look, there's probably some people
to think, I know he kind of went deep on some subjects.
No, this was like Andrew Huberman, the shallow zone, right?
You know, yeah, this is the Cliff Notes version.
It's podcast, you can find work, it's everywhere, right?
Any other podcast?
Spotify.
Yep.
It's Huberman Lab, Huberman Lab podcast.
He's going to take everything that he mentioned today for four minutes or six minutes.
He's going to talk about for two and a half to three hours with a bunch of scientific
data to back it up.
Awesome to listen to.
And you can figure out they're very, very efficiently titled, hey, this is the subject
of this podcast.
Here's what you can learn.
And I touched on some of these things today.
Hab, it's stress, you know, hormones.
You've got all these different topics.
It's just awesome information.
Also they can find you at Huberman.
You say Huberman or Huberman Lab.
Huberman Lab.com.
This is kind of a good access point for everything.
You're on YouTube and Facebook.
Both of those are Andrew Huberman.
And then you're on Twitter, on Instagram, sucking people into the algorithm, bringing
out the anger in the hatred, collecting data on who's frustrated and the anger system.
Both those are at.
It's a Twitter and Instagram at Huberman Lab.
Echo, you got any other questions?
Of course.
What do you got?
I'm going to keep it.
So the variable reward, what was the random intermittent reward?
Yeah.
So it doesn't that kind of illustrate the value of playing hard to get in like dating
and stuff.
It does.
I'm wondering if you're going to ask about this.
Some people understand this intuitively and they catch string people.
They don't reward everything.
It's amazing the tactics that people will come up with in order to get the text responsive.
They're not getting it.
Here's what we know.
A picture is worth a thousand words.
Use your imagination.
Some people realize, ah, you know, when I text them, they don't respond.
But when I send a photo of a particular kind, their responses, instant genius.
People learn.
People's response schedules very quickly.
This carcans backed a childhood and we could do a whole episode on this as a child.
One of your primary, the brain's a prediction machine or it's trying to make predictions.
That's what it wants to do.
And young children learn to engage in certain behaviors to predict and control the care
taking of their parents.
This is important.
It's not manipulative.
It's vital.
And adults do it too.
And they do it in the same machinery that's designed for infant caregiver attachment is repurposed
in adulthood.
So when we want something from somebody, then we tend to pay careful attention to their
movements and when they respond and their non-responses.
And random entertainment and reward is what a lot of people use to keep people along
for their right.
Now, there's a positive version of this where to keep the intensity high in the positive
sense in relationship.
Yeah, it's good to miss someone.
It's good to take some breaks.
You don't want to overdo the dopamine system because it will deplete itself.
Time together, time apart is useful.
The cozy parts of love and the more intense romantic, lusty parts of love are both vital
to the arc of a relationship.
But one, you could imagine how time apart could reset some of the dopamine.
People seem more attractive and exciting when you've been apart from them for a while.
And a lot of people kind of suffocate their relationship with serotonin.
So to speak.
Too much time together will give you all the warm, cozy stuff, but will it's antagonistic
as we say to the dopamine system.
But people manipulate using these systems.
That's unfortunate, but I'm not an expert in how to counsel them on that.
So it is, you might not be an expert on how to counsel them on it.
But if people are aware of it, they can do a better job combating, becoming a victim
to those scenarios.
And I always say, you should be very careful how much you attach your dopamine to something
that is not under your complete control.
If you give your entire dopamine system over to somebody else's responses or availability
you're setting yourself up for a pretty rough life, even if it's a great relationship.
Because either whether or not by decision or by death or by circumstance, if that relationship
were to go, what are you going to do?
So I think people tend to get overly focused on how much dopamine someone else can provide.
I think it's great.
I have a statement about addiction, which I think matches the scientific mechanism very
closely, which is that addiction is a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you
pleasure.
Whereas a good life involves a progressive expansion of the number of things that bring
you pleasure.
So try and continue to derive pleasure from, for instance, time with friends.
We all know the guy who's got the new girlfriend and then disappears and then comes back
six months later, he's like, yeah, you know.
So I told you so, you know, it's okay to miss one another.
It's okay to miss one another.
It's okay to not text all the time when you're with friends, spend time with friends.
Be available for emergencies, but spend time with friends.
These cuts both way, women with women with men with men and assuming that standard relationship
model.
The, you know, when you're with your guy friends, be with them.
Right?
Ladies, when you're with your girlfriends, be with them.
And you are missing one another is great because you're keeping that dopamine system
ready.
So the, I mean, on a kind of a more positive note, you can kind of use it as, like, in the
courting phase, we'll say, sure.
Like, don't just throw yourself at somebody because you kind of jam their system up a little
bit, right?
Yeah, I mean, you know, at some point you don't want to game things too much, right?
It's a, this gets right.
This gets into some deeper issues about power and dynamics in the relationships, right?
You know, it is giving tons of gifts to someone assigned that they're in charge or that
you're in charge.
Why don't know, depends on your relative finances, right?
In one case, you could be the person saying, I have resources and I can take care of
you forever.
In a sense, you're in the power position.
In another case, you're just showering them with gifts in a desperate attempt to get
them to like you.
So there's a lot of context of this that makes it tricky, but I would say that giving
to get is a very dangerous thing, pure giving without the expectation of a reward and
exchange for that is great because then both people get to experience that as a positive
thing and, you know, giving to get it puts you in a very vulnerable place.
So essentially with great power comes great responsibility.
Absolutely.
That's how guys get friends on, no?
That's how you get friends on.
You can be like, what do you call like a catch, but you give too much to quick.
You get friends on.
Yeah, I mean, I confess I have a few close female friends that have over the years.
Most of my friends are men and have a relationship with a woman.
So that's got, that's just what how it's been organized.
I don't, I haven't developed many close friendships with women.
So friend zone is a bit of a foreign concept to me, but I hear it exists.
Yeah, it's like, yeah, basically the girl doesn't have sexual attraction to the guy, even
though the guy is like the perfect guy.
But it's usually because the guy positions himself below the girl, like he worships
her too quick or something like this and the girl's like, oh, he's not like a challenge,
you know, dating sounds.
I'm a big, I think it was Tim Ferriss, our mutual friend Tim Ferriss that a long time
ago said, you know, the quality of your life is largely reflective of the number of really
difficult conversations that you're willing to have.
And I love that because I'm not very good at difficult conversations.
Who is?
That's why they're called difficult.
But I think the person concerned about being friend zone should sit down with the person
and say, listen, here's what I really want.
What is the probability that's going to happen in the next week?
And if it's a, well, the 25% okay, well, hit the rip record.
And if it's a 75% or I've been waiting for you to say this, like, let's go.
You know, I mean, it seems like direct communication is lacking in the, I don't know,
I can't remember.
We're about to go, we're about to open up a whole other scenario here.
Yeah, I'm not sure I'm the best person.
I'm not sure.
We're not.
We don't. If you've got the, let's say you got a girl that you're trying to talk to.
And you think you might be in the friends zone up, sort of assaulting her with the
hate where to where my hat that I'm going to say that might not be the best.
What I would probably do is assume we're just friends and behave that way.
Don't assume that you're going to, don't assume that there's chance you just assume
hey, you know what, she probably doesn't really like me that much.
That's you, something you make back off.
If, if she ends up actually feeling that way, then she's going to come and let you know
that.
So your behavior should be, oh, she just wants to be friends.
Cool.
Don't box her into a corner with the, with the edge of the human, freaking direct assault.
Hey, where are we at?
Girl.
Well, I'm not even sure it has to be a verbal communication.
I think you could just be a, you know, is this relationship over romantic sexual relationship
or is this a friendship?
And you don't, there are numerous ways to have that conversation, but obviously it should
be consensual age appropriate, context appropriate, species appropriate.
But, but listen, what you're describing to me is for interrogatory because I'm not,
I just not of the, the ilk that is in the habit of, of having a lot of, you know, friendships
as I for male friendships.
I wouldn't, that's just as unhappy.
This is a, was that, I think we just got a humble brag.
I think we got a, he's like, listen, I don't know what you're talking about, this friend's
own thing, never been there.
Not a thing.
I like it, bro.
I'm saying that.
I'm just saying it's hard for a video of that.
And that anyone who'd find themselves in this position, I mean, also be a scientist, the
data or the data, right?
I do believe that somebody wants to do something they're basically going to do it.
And if they don't, they're not going to.
Yeah, yeah.
Jack.
The going back to a little bit more serious, no, what you said about, you know, you
shouldn't give to get, this is something I breathe leaders on all the time.
If the reason you're taking care of your team is so that you can get something out of
them, they're going to see that.
And it's not going to work out well.
So very similar, very similar, fought pattern there.
Andrew, are you going to, you know, closing thoughts before we shut it down?
Just really want to say thank you for having me here today.
It's a truly an honor and pleasure.
I don't say that formally.
And as a listener of your podcast, this has been a thrill for me.
I've learned a lot from both of you guys.
And while I'm not going to roll you to you, because I don't know how, maybe someday.
And yeah, thanks so much.
Well, thanks for coming.
And back at you, you know, as a listener of your podcast, it's awesome to be able
to sit down and drill down on some of these things.
And you know, really a really important thing.
I would say there's a theme that I've taken away from your podcast, but then that I absolutely
reinforced today.
I talked about it a little bit.
The fact that the things that you're talking about really allow us to bring awareness
to what's happening in our bodies, in our minds physiologically.
And therefore, we actually have more influence than we think over what our fault patterns
are and the way we behave, which ultimately allows us as people to take more ownership
over the way we feel the way we behave.
And those are really important things.
And I think just understanding the nature of our own physiology, better is a huge step
forward in people living better at lives.
So thank you for coming down and joining us.
And thank you for taking that information and passing it on to people for free.
You know, you do this stuff for free.
Your podcast is free and you've invested obviously a ton of time to try and learn these
things.
And the fact that you give it back to people for free is just a testament to the kind
of person you are.
And I appreciate it.
And I hope you keep getting after it, man.
Thanks for coming down.
Thank you.
And with that Andrew Huberin has left the building.
He's rolled out.
Echo, did you gather any good information?
Yes.
Lots of going on.
You can see there's probably going to be follow on podcasts.
Yes.
But you could have taken like one of those questions that you kind of like said and like
do four hours just on that.
Not to mention the stuff that you probably wouldn't even understand.
That's like another what?
12, 16 hours per week.
It's crazy.
Check.
No, great guy.
Great information.
Definitely cool to talk to and you know even just when he was leaving you know we'll
definitely get some stuff done.
Do some more stuff in the future.
Yeah, man.
I really, I really do the point that I was making kind of throughout the podcast and that
I kind of closed out with like look just being aware of these things makes you better off.
Then you realize that you can influence the way you feel the way you think, the way you
sleep, the way you be.
You have way more influence.
You don't have to wake up in the morning.
Go man, sleep good night.
No, why?
You don't need to do that.
You don't need to go.
I don't really feel like we're going out.
You don't need to do that.
I know why I don't feel like working right out right now because I expanded a bunch of
dope for me on something that's earliest morning.
But you know what?
It doesn't matter.
It doesn't mean I'm a bad person.
It just means that you need to go and get it started.
Take ownership of what's happened.
So I thought that was well worth the price of admission.
Oh, yeah. If you're at the tail end of a four something hour podcast right now, I think
that right there was worth the price that you just paid.
Maybe you two exit.
Maybe you listen to it at two x speed right now.
I'm not going to go.
It's possible.
What do you think?
Well, percentage of people go to x speed when they're listening.
Well, depends on what portion.
Yeah.
Sometimes, it's suspect.
Sometimes they do two x.
Sometimes they do one x.
With this one, I don't know man.
This is a kind of where Brad.
I want to listen to it to x.
You want to get it.
That's going to go.
Some of that stuff's going to go over your head.
I think you're going to want one x on this one.
Yes, for sure.
I'd say a lot of our podcasts actually are one x series.
Yeah.
It's true.
I was surprised though, as you probably could tell, that he wasn't as familiar with
the idea of the frenzo.
Because I think this is just my hypothesis.
Yeah.
My neurobiological hypothesis.
That the frenzo.
The frenzo.
The frenzo is a direct result.
But hey, wait, was the frenzo on a thing when you were a kid?
Yeah.
Okay, see?
Was it called the expression?
No, okay, but it was a thing.
Oh, yeah.
That you were in.
I think you were just kind of saying it.
To be honest, I remember one instance where I was in the front.
Well, put it this way.
I had like one foot in the frenzo and one foot out of the frenzo.
I was surprised on how little influence I had over the scenario.
And then thinking back, I was in the frenzo.
So because I was this person, man, if I understood this variable reward scenario, better.
Better.
I would have had more influence over that.
But it's true.
I think it's a direct result of this, of not understanding the variable reward.
If you're just like, oh, yeah, freaking, I'm just going to do everything that I think
this girl wants me to do.
That in and of itself creates a lack of variable reward.
That's right.
Yeah.
We're considering this to be a problem.
So it's going to keep you around for that whatever the serotonin, what is your tone.
But there's no real, there's no real dopamine because of that phenomenon.
It was flooding it with serotonin.
It's too much, too much.
Not enough dopamine.
So stay out the frenzo.
Just tell the frenzo.
Especially someone might you that apparently spent a lot of time in the frenzo.
That was a long time ago.
Hey, take your listening.
We started it long, but that's the way it happened sometimes.
If you want to support the podcast and you want to support yourself, you want to get
some, you used out for the, you used down for the discipline go.
Yeah.
And down for the discipline go.
And if you notice, with no one really made a thing out of it, but he mentioned
the anine, right?
When he was like, and he said, oh, I like the anine, I like it.
Some people mix it with coffee so you don't get the jitters a lot.
So, I was about to say, wow, well, I don't want to interrupt.
Yeah.
Plus then it sounds like you're trying to hard sell something.
Well, actually we did.
I don't want to be that guy.
Exactly.
But yes, we have the ultimate formulation for energy.
For the ultimate formula.
We have to kind of have the ultimate formulation.
Yes, sir.
And think about it.
And he said, he straight up takes alpha GPC.
Takes it as a supplement except when he's drinking the go.
Because alpha GPC, he mentioned the the anine and all the benefits of whatever.
Hey, look, we kept it cool.
We're not going to make a big deal out of it, but it's awesome.
We kind of got you covered on all fronts.
So, that's awesome.
If you want to get some of that, go to jockelfuel.com.
You go to wallongget some of it.
You can go to vitamin shop and get whatever.
You can get milk, by the way, which is, which is, look, I love to tell you, hey, you
need additional protein and you do.
I get it.
But you also need something that tastes hell a good.
Get yourself some milk, get yourselves some joint warfare, some super krill.
I've been noticing you've been saying, how a good lately.
Really?
That's like the third time you said in the last three days, two days.
Yes, sir.
Is it kind of an older, like, an 80s expression, isn't it?
If I'm not mistaken, it's just more than California expression.
For sure.
Because in Maine, we say wicked good.
Yes.
Yeah, those are those, that know about Maine.
Yeah, we know that.
But I think that's a hell of good is like, like, when you first said it, I was like, wait,
what is the reason for that?
Oh, I don't know, but that's still remains a mystery.
Now the last year, correct.
Yep.
It is hell of a good vitamin shop.
Wall-watt, jockelfuel.com.
Get yourself some supplementation that's going to make you bigger, faster, stronger, smarter,
smarter.
Pull mine yards.
There you go.
It's a chemically two.
Yeah.
Because we didn't talk that much about the sugar.
Oh, we did talk about the crash.
Right?
You get all these crashes.
You start doing all this stuff to your brain chemistry.
Get these crashes.
Don't get them.
Get them up.
You don't have to deal with that kind of stuff anymore.
No, darkofool.com.
Check out origin usa.com.
You're probably going to need a ghee, right?
Because we're training GJ2.
It look.
I would love to tell you where that ghee down to the market, out to the club.
You can't.
You know, you can't.
It's probably going to get you friends on.
Don't let that happen.
No, you might have a female.
Let's say you're a male.
You might have a female that's real into GJ2, which is super cool.
Maybe she's down.
You know, maybe she's wearing a ghee.
Maybe we're wearing ghee's out.
Maybe that's what we're doing.
Just do it sometimes.
How about that?
But that might not be the case.
You might need it.
You might need a pair of jeans.
Right?
We got your jeans too.
Made in America.
Made in the United States of America.
Yeah.
DIY.
Do it yourself.
That's so.
You know, only because Andrew kind of mentioned this DIY mentality that you get from
the punk rock, the hard core scene.
It's kind of like do it yourself.
Right?
By the way, that's why jockel publishing exists.
That's why we have jockel few.
Because we're making stuff.
We don't go.
Hey, you know, we'd really like to do this.
So we'll just, you know, like, hey, hey, hey.
No, we're doing it.
That's what we're doing.
I don't want to split hairs here.
But this might be small tangent, but I think it's important.
DIY has like a contextual element to it.
It's short for do it yourself.
Yeah.
But so put it this way.
DIY doesn't mean do it yourself.
And do it yourself is do what I why, but not all the, I, why means all the things
that do it yourself mean.
Okay, so we're doing what you do.
So DIY, if you say, if you're on my idea, if you're going to do it, then you
move on, this is a technicality that may or may not be important.
And DIY, when you say DIY, if I say, hey, if jockel, you say, hey, can you get me some
water?
And I say, do it yourself.
Okay, so let's do it.
That is one of the many do it yourself.
DIY means like usually it's done, not like as a favor, but like as a production,
kind of a thing.
And then you just did it yourself, like kind of makeshift.
Okay, it has a makeshift, like kind of quality kind of feel to it.
So you can say.
You good?
Yes, okay.
Let's go to jockelstore.com.
So jockelstore, which started as a do I DIY scenario, but it's not anymore.
It's a well, you know, the varying levels of met, oiled machine.
Yeah.
Right now, got some good stuff on there, got some discipline equals freedom, shirts and
hat, turdies, merch, if you will, but it's good quality stuff.
Not just some cheap stuff.
It's good quality.
Arguably the most wearable clothing.
That seems to be the consensus kind of around.
Yes.
Many people, when I say men, I mean, for real, like countless, not the kind of like three.
Like countless people have said, it's my free favorite shirt, not just because of the design
and the representing on the path, but because of how it fits.
What about when they get a shirt locker shirt?
Same.
It's a lot of the same.
And they think, man, there's only a few people that have this shirt.
Like Andrew was talking about, he was talking about the thunder, trucks shirt.
Oh, it's limited.
That's why he saved.
He still has it to this day.
He has it to this day.
You can just shirt a locker shirt.
You're kind of in that arena.
Exclusive and limited.
Yeah.
It's true.
So what that is, if you don't know, it's a subscription scenario.
You can make sure every month.
Here's the thing about that shirt that you've talked about.
What did it say?
Something about something something.
It's only sponsored by thunder trucks.
And I only got this t-shirt.
It's just lousy.
T-shirt.
Okay, so this is why I remember that because there are other shirt companies that do, you
know, like the kind of shirt companies that make fun shirts, like that are knock up, like a,
they almost borrow like the concept in the design from like Coca-Cola.
But it says, chope.
Instead of Coca-Cola, it says chope.
You know, like that idea.
Like there's a few that I saw that had that same thing.
I said, I'm something something something like something real impressive.
And then it said, but I only got this lousy t-shirt.
It was like, that's hard.
I remember it.
Yeah.
That was the thing.
You know, I ran the Boston Marathon and all I got was this one.
Yeah.
I went to Bulgaria and all I got was this lousy t-shirt.
So yeah.
But yeah, some shirts are exclusive.
Yeah.
That's just the nature of the things.
All those things that we just said are a little bit lame.
Right?
Unless it's from thunder trucks and it's limited.
And then all of a sudden it becomes kind of rad.
You are kind of hype.
Subscribe to this podcast and don't forget about the Jockel underground.
If you've been rolling those out, talking about some detailed information, giving lots
of Q&A.
So there's a way to access us for questions.
If you want to ask a question, we can answer it on Jockel underground.com.
Go and check that out if you want to support us.
DIY, right?
Because you can't let the man control everything.
You can't get power to the man.
You can't.
You don't want to.
You've got to create your own platform over on the side in case you have to escape
out the side hatch.
So we're ready.
Jocquenterground.com.
You want to kick in a little $8.18 a month.
It's cool.
We appreciate it.
We'll be ready.
So that's that YouTube channel.
Subscribe to the YouTube channel.
Don't forget about origin USA.
They have a YouTube channel.
Flipside Canvas.com.
The code of my are making cool stuff to hang on your walls.
Got a bunch of books.
I've written a bunch of books.
If you want to check those out, check them out.
You can get them anywhere you get books.
You can also check out Jockel Podcast.com.
And you can go to books from the podcast and you can find all the books there.
So that's for books that are not necessarily going to have written books that we've covered
on podcast.
There's like an email thing to sign up for too on the podcast.
Jockel Podcast.com.
No, that's on Jockel Store.
Jockel Store.
The store.
Yeah.
The podcast is pretty straightforward as far as information is around in the podcast.
I just go to the website.
Check.
Good to go.
We also have Eshtonfront.com.
This is a leadership consultancy.
We work with all kinds of companies.
And we teach the leadership principles.
Some of them you heard me talk about today.
But if you have problems in your organization, their leadership problems.
I'm here to tell you.
So if you want help with that, go to Eshtonfront.com for details.
We also have some live events.
We got the mustard coming up.
We got battle field.
We go and walk, get his bird.
We go and walk, little big her, big horn.
Get the lessons earned from those.
So check that out.
Eshtonfront.com.
Also we have a training academy.
It'd be better to be better in life.
Extremeownership.com.
You want to take ownership of your life.
You want to ask me a question live.
Go to extremeownership.com.
We got a bunch of courses on there.
It's going to make every aspect of your life better.
It's going to make you better.
So check that out.
Extremeownership.com.
If you want to help service members active and retired, gold star families check out America's
Mighty Warriors.org.
That's a Mark Lee's mom, mom, Lee.
Great organization.
Also heroes in horses.com.
Check that one out.
And don't forget, for Andrew Huberman, you can find him at Hubermanlab.com.
And on YouTube and on Facebook, he's at Andrew Huberman and then on Twitter and on Instagram,
he's at Huberman Lab.
And as far as Echo and I go, we're both on Twitter.
We're on the Graham.
We're on Facebook.
Echo's at Echo Charles.
I'm at Joaquin.
Look, no matter what you're going on there for, just watch your back.
Because Algartham's going to sneak up.
We learned a lot about that today.
That dopamine hitter.
You're trying to get that dopamine hitter.
Next thing, you know, you're a dope.
So be careful.
And thanks once again to Andrew Huberman for coming on.
Really again, he's putting a lot of great knowledge out there and we definitely appreciate
it.
So thanks, Andrew, for driving all the way down here to make this happen.
And I look forward to returning the favor in the future.
And of course, thanks to the service men and service women out there on the frontlines.
Make it possible for us to sit back here and get educated and learn and live our lives.
Thank you for what you do.
Also, thanks for the service of our police and law enforcement firefighters, paramedics,
EMTs, dispatchers, correctional officers, border patrol, secret service.
All the first responders out there, you all do what you do so that we can do what we do.
And we appreciate it.
And to everyone else out there.
Everyone else out there.
Look, there's a lot of ways to get better.
We learn today that you can become aware of.
You should have become more aware of things.
You should realize you have more influence.
You realize you have influence over the way you feel, the way you think.
You could take ownership of that.
Learn a lot about that today.
And you know what?
Knowledge and learning and understanding are great.
But you know what else they don't mean anything without action.
So yes, learn and educate and enlighten yourself, but also don't forget to go out there
every day and freaking get after it.
Until next time, Zekko and Joko out.